	(1). [1.1] 
   		Allah has created endless space, and in it He has established the micro-module of all that we know and that we know not, like the universe, to serve humanity with their potentials from its birth to its extinction. As our show of thanks to Allah, we have to be in Praise of Him all the time, in our feelings of every real moment.
	(2). [1.2] 
 		His Mercy rewards us with beautiful things in exchange for the worst of our evil deeds much more graciously, if we repent and correct our ways at any point of our time during our lives (39.35). For He is the Most Merciful. 
   	(3). [1.3] 
 		To Him is the Reign and the Kingdom by whose command and admission do all things happen around us at any moment.
    	(4). [2.1] 
 		These are the initials of Allah: A is the first letter of Aalim, meaning the All-Knowing. L is the initial of His Name Latif, meaning the Gentle, and M is the initial of His Name Mumin, meaning the Giver of Faith. Therefore the meaning of the Three Initials Alif, Laam, Meem - A L M combined is: The All-Knowing is the Most Gentle in imparting the Faith.
	(5). [2.2] 
 		Refer (6.155). This is the only Book on earth that shall guide human beings in their momentary lives towards higher and higher glory and peace until they depart for the lasting Paradises.
	
	(6). [2.3] 
 		Being constant in the remembrance of Allah is being prayerful all the time.­ Allah loves the righteous. What is meant by the memory of Allah? It is remembering that it is only His Attributes, working in our moments of lives - and not what we desire, nor what we aim, nor the drive of our knowledge and struggles all through our lives. If only we remember in this way, it is seen by His Holiness as our show of gratitude to Him. And He is the Appreciator of Thanksgiving. He will provide us with more and more from His Benevolence. That is the Life Promised for us by the Most Merciful. 
	(7). [2.4] 
 		Allah sends His command to everyone and reveals to them all the right course in their lives. So, each one has his way personally directed by their only God, and they turn to the Guidance, obeying Allah. That is each one’s Qibla, (i.e.) turning one’s mind to the guidance of Allah (2.148; 22.67).
   	(8). [2.5] 
 		Those whose minds turn in the direction of God and face Him alone shall fear Him. Such have known their Qibla, and are meeting Allah always, and prostrate in obedience to Him. They are victorious.  Thus the Qibla is the virtuousness Allah has mandated in The Manual, ‘The Book”.
    	(9). [2.7] 
 		They have lost their discernment; (10). their hearing and the comprehension are lost; (11). And their insight and clarity of thought are abolished, besides their path is towards one of doom. By their hearts, ears and sights they lean on to all the evils as their ways, for they, having lost their insight, would only think whatever they follow is the right path. This is because they had not turned to Allah in their prayers but elsewhere, say, the West or the East, where they think the Holy Place is situated. But Allah says it is not holy at all to turn your faces to East or West (2:177).
       	
	(12). [2.8] 
 		By Allah we mean The Almighty help, power, protection, wisdom and guidance are nearer than our lives. Continually He delivers to us His Will as our wishful tomorrow, (i.e.,) our eternal Kingdom upon the heavens and the earth. Allah says to our heart, “Have a better life, hereafter!” (13). And this is His firmest say in our hearts. If we are believers in His final word, henceforth our worry and fear shall be far removed from our mind and peace returns by His leave. To the contrary, if we continue to worry, and concern about tomorrow, we are to know that our belief is more upon the evil forces, Shaitan, who speaks in our mind against Allah’s Final say. Such people’s faith stands corrupted at this stage.
            (14). [2.10]  
 		All diseases start from the faithlessness in our corrupt minds as punishment from Allah that manifests by their symptoms of pain and agony, both mental and physical; and, from Allah would follow much more afflictions because we lie, ‘we have faith’. Despite our knowledge, it is Allah: the Almighty shall alone cure the diseases and distresses (6.17; 10.107), we ignore Him, set aside our faithfulness to Him, and commit open shirk, rushing to the insolent doctors who say: “We will save your lives with our modern science.” They thus denounce the All-Powerful, The MostHigh. These specialists and their advocates cause mischief, confusion and corruption in the already diseased hearts of the people, making them fall out of their faith. We become ingrate liars and hypocrites before Allah; and, we continue to increasingly suffer until we die an agonising death in the ICU at the hands of the specialist doctors, as rejecters of faith in Allah. 
    	
	(15). [2.12] 
 		When we invent a lie against the Truth with our intelligence, the recompense to this atrocious act from the Almighty is to deprive us of our ability to distinguish between the right and wrong; as a result, we would fail to see the right path and would be the castaways to our utter despair. We shall not appreciate us, as our higher faculties fail to function. That is the reward for our crying lies against the Signs of Allah, and association of partners with Him for any good we wish for us. And most people associate themselves with God violating their faith (12.106).  So we fear Allah and guard our faith in His Name, saying: O The Protector, protect us when we set out. 
	
	(16). [2.14]  
 		The jinns are creations from the flame of fire, while human beings are creations from the earth. Both are created to be faithful to Allah, the God of all the worlds. In both these creations, there are faithless to God. The jinn has a form, invisible to the human eyes, but man can surely have control over them through His Willpower in his soul by the leave of Allah. Jinn cannot touch the man with its ungodliness in any way if he is following the Will of Allah. But the inflamed smoky jinn can enter the rejecting, disbelieving faithless heart of human beings, casting into it more rejection and disbelief. The evil Shaitanic force is thus allowed into one’s heart by the disbelievers so that the jinn carve out a niche for themselves in the hearts of the rejecters of the Truth and in the hearts of those that worship besides God, and follow the lies. These people were never left alone by the jinn, and they constantly charm them towards all things of vanities and keeping them at variance with all the Truth, all the time. The jinn spread in their hearts all kinds of misrepresentations about the believers and create contempt and hatred against them. These jinns are the only causative factor to have set Shaitan-possessed majority people against a small population of God-fearing men. Initially, these evil people will dismiss the God-fearing men as a meek population. Then as they grow in strength,  they mock them behind their backs; and then, as the God-fearing people further in their God’s blessings, the mischievous come to your assembly. They disguise them as believers for closer encounters with you, which they think would help them plot against you, and against the believers. 
	And the friendly Shaitanic jinn always takes a close watch on you without you noticing them. And when you are alone, the jinn in your heart begins chatting with you, drawing you to get into a conversation. We see this as the thought process in people's hearts. But in truth, their hearts are infested with the evil jinns because they are weak in their faith in, 'Only Allah'. Allah always purifies our hearts through His inspiration that drives away the Shaitanic influences from us. His revelation by which we will be able to see The Light in the light. Our brightness chases the jinns away from our hearts, making room for further enlightenment. About this time the angels - the malayikas, enter the inspired hearts, further purifying it by the leave of Allah.
	(17). [2.16] 
 		The evil path is the unrestrained behaviour of one who ridicules and mocks at others. Be prayerful in that you shall not make fun of others for, as long as you have that habit, your prayers will not be answered by Allah - this will lead to your hopelessness about your future.
	(18). [2.17]  
 		The example here of kindling a fire is meant to explain the unforgivable life of the majority people who live associating partners to Allah in some form or other, which amounts to leading the life towards hellfire. 
    	(19). [2.18]
 		The deaf, dumb and blind are those who do not use their criterion to discern from what they see and hear, and so, they cannot speak any fruitful words. These are the ones left astray.
	(20). [2.20] 
 		If Allah so wish He would remove their comprehension through their hearing and sight; they would be like deaf and blind.
	(21). [2.21] 
 		Unless you are God-fearing, your life in this world would be miserable and dreadful.
    	(22). [2.22] 
 		For the earth to produce its fruits and all kinds of foods for us, the rain shall have to pour down from the sky, and the sky act as a protective ceiling for the earth about which our agricultural knowledge is blind, dumb and deaf. But the world proudly says: “We create the Food”. This is a perfect example of man’s association to Allah, while they know it is sheer arrogance. When Allah sends down rain and creates food and fruits, we eat thereof; if He stops the rain, we starve. An essential point to focus our attention here is that we invented the knowledge and money against man’s life. We associated and valued the money above the God created water, fruits and food. We imposed the trade of food-for-money and caused the humans to die of starvation when the fruits of the land are plentiful and fertile by the Grace of the Most Benevolent. This association of man-implemented money to Allah’s Grace has brought the wrath of Allah upon the man. Allah’s curse is upon us until the Day of Doom. Until we abolish associating money to God's generous provisions, and the Satanic money is burnt out from the surface of the earth, there is pandemic conflict among humankind till they die, killing each other over money. We know well, money is the cause of all evil, yet we associate this to Allah’s Grace and Ampleness. Allah shall never forgive associations to any of His Names. Here are His Names - The Most Gracious, The Most Merciful, and The Most Benevolent.  That is the Truth in our Ruh, the Criterion, which is breathed into each of us by Allah at the time we are born, and that which we shall possess all our life as the Right Guidance. Those men and women who abide by the will of Ruh, with utmost humility and fear, they are the bondmen of Allah. Such of these shall not suffer any affliction or adversities all their lives, for Allah honours with His wisdom. 
	(23). [2.23] 
 		Every verse in this Book contains the message of blessings, warnings and glad tidings, the Truth of which would turn over a new leaf in one’s life creating a new chapter comprising of faith, belief, hope and perseverance in the cause of their God. The verses of this Book touches and reforms the heart of a reader, while the ‘human written books’ are full of discrepancies and inconsistencies (4.82), following which shall never guide anyone overcoming his failing situation.
    	(24). [2.25]
 		Our lives in this world, the past and the present are not the same, though we are living with the seemingly similar life, and with the same provisions such as air, water and food, but they are not at all the same. Every moment, we earn a changed life and requirements as decreed by God either as a reward for our righteousness or punishment for our sinful activities. It seems as if we inhale the same air, drink water and eat the food and fruits. But Allah says, “No, they are different if you know!” 
    	(25). [2.26] 
 		When Allah commands a mosquito to bite you, you cannot chase it away except to turn to Him for forgiveness; all the measures you undertake to wipe out the mosquitoes kill only you or smother you first. But you cannot make the mosquitoes extinct. Or, smaller than that, say, a bacteria or a virus when it attacks you by His leave, you cannot escape them. If you surrender to the Will of Allah, by submitting to Him entirely, then He guides you. To the contrary, if you reject His forgiveness and believe in the use of your worldly knowledge to save you from such afflictions, then you are left wandering towards doom. Though you know well that to Allah is your final return, you threw away the promise of Allah behind your backs, and with pride, you began to fight the mosquitoes, bacteria and viruses. You shall die of the afflictions and diseases, even as you fight them. 
    	(26). [2.27] 
 		There were many an occasion of afflictions and distress we suffered in our past, and, there were many promises we made pleading with God to deliver us out of those hard and testing times. And no sooner did Allah save us by His Mercy than we began breaking our promises to Him and became ungratefully proud, denouncing His very remembrance. Oneness with Allah believing in Him alone is the covenant we made with Allah. Our deed is to keep piety, good deeds and faith in Him, united all the time. But we dissociated ourselves from all these promises and became the losers.
	(27). [2.29] 
 		We have to stay connected with Him, in His remembrance all our lives so that we are one with the All-Knowing, the All-Powerful. With the Creator’s nearness, we shall be guided through all the liveliness in the earth and the skies, and in our journey to eternal life with all the knowledge and wisdom of Him. 
	(28). [2.30] 
 		The inhabitants of the skies are the malayika and the jinns. Allah has breathed His Ruh - His Soul in each of us to receive His command and to make us submit to Him. And, to conduct us in His way during our life in this world so as to elevate us to exercise Allah’s authority in this universe comprising the earth and the skies and everything in between. Those who wishfully submit and surrender to His Will are the servants of Allah; and, among them are also those who soulfully accept His Will. They are those who are raised in grades by their faith. Allah chooses among such faithful servants, the most steadfast during their testing times. Whosoever is thus chosen, shall not act on their likes and dislikes (18.82).
    	When Allah created man, He created him for the Throne, The Arsh. He who strives for it ascends to it by His Grace. Those who succeed in this are but a very few, and it is them who have attained the status of Adam, fit to be chosen as a Prophet or a Messenger among the human beings. On the other hand, there is the vast majority of men who are ignorantly proud and arrogant on the earth, who live like animals by their five senses alone, incur the wrath of Allah. Allah would strip them of the empowerment He has granted them in the world and make them descend and get lower even from their existing level as a common man. Then, never will they have the Grace to lead an honourable life in this world. They live amidst chaos, creating mischief and causing bloodshed; this is what the jinns, the inhabitants of the sky, saw as human nature. In their very outward view, they see humanity as lowly creations; and since, in truth, the jinns are in the lower status to man, they could never see their ability to have the power, by His Will, over all the things in the skies and on the earth. And that by Allah’s leave, they shall ascend in Wisdom, well-suited for the Throne, The Arsh.
	(29). [2.31] 
 		The jinn and the angels are the inhabitants of the sky. They do not live on the air, water and food as do the people in this world.
	(30). [2.32] 
 		The angels will never speak against Allah, but the jinns do just like human beings. The words of Praise to Allah are spoken by those jinns who are the believers among them.
    	(31). [2.34] 
 		The Jinns and the Angels are the inhabitants of the sky. When Allah commanded them all to obey and fall to the leadership of Adam, the Man, chosen for His Revelation, Wisdom and Authority, all the angels and the believers among the Jinns prostrated to the Will of Allah, except Iblis, because of his unwarranted overbearing pride. So Iblis, by his open defiance before Allah, became the leader for all those who were concealing their rejection, and they all together were apparent enemies to Allah. Showing pride before people is considered by Allah, a brazen demonstration of rebellion to His order. Such foes to the Almighty Truth are the evil Shaitanic forces against which we shall guard us, by prostrating to the Will of Allah, lest we become one with the Iblis and the Jinns following him, tasting the hell in this life and lead us to the Hell, in the life after.
    	
	(32). [2.35] 
	(Refer 48:18)
	Allah says, “Do not touch the tree and set your eyes on that! The earth's thousands of millions of kinds of fruits are not anyone’s property, but for the entire population around it; and, fence not the trees off and usurp away the gardens of trees intended for all humans. But if you trespass, then it is that you consider the land is yours while you know well the skies and the earth, and everything in between belongs only to Allah. And by doing so, you will become the transgressors. No area on the ground belongs to any single individual but belongs to the God of the skies and the lands. None shall claim rights to the gardens and forests. All the trees and gardens are the properties of the entire humanity. Such transgression would unavoidably lead to chaos and bloodshed.  
	(33). [2.38] 
 		The guidance descends upon the hearts of each of us, from the Ruh, Allah has breathed into us. The Ruh-ul-Amin, one of the two angels, governing us from our Ruh, guides us by the leave of Allah in every matter, and in our every activity. He guides us from the path of error so as to make us grateful to Allah, and to honour His Ruh. As a believer in Allah, we have to believe in the angels, the Ruh ul Amin and the Ruh ul Quddus, the Angel Messengers from Allah, abiding in our Ruh. If only we follow the two Angel Messengers, there is no way we would fear nor grieve all through our lives.  
	
	(34). [2.39] 
 		The Angel-Messenger Ruh ul Amin is a sure Sign from Allah, whose guidance if you follow in your day-to-day life, you shall not falter, and so, neither fear nor grief would ever touch you.
	(35). [2.40]  The promise we have with us from Allah is, if we abide by His Messenger Ruh ul Amin, we shall neither fear nor grieve. (36). Allah gives His word to us through the Messenger who says, “Peaceful life is enjoined upon you.” We know all good things come only from Allah; therefore, Allah expects us not to perform His promise by our physical means, but to entrust The Trust back to Him. And, Allah would keep up the Trust we have placed with Him; He would reward us amply for our obedience to His Will and Command.
	(37). [2.43]  And this is following the Will and obeying the command of Allah, all the time having a sense of fear for Him – all of these, in essence, is the Sign of us being in the consistent prayerfulness as we are constantly well-aware of the Most Powerful.
    	(38). [2.44] One's self is the God's Conscience, The Veda. The Ruh of Allah reveals to him of the Scripture that helps him to judge if he is on the right course.
	(39). [2.45] The good deeds are spending the life in the Names of Allah, (i.e.) exhibiting our attitudes, of His Attributes.
        	(40). [2.51] Allah promised Musa thirty nights of His gracious mercy and with the immensity of His benevolence to his people as a reward for their patience and endurance in the Name of Allah, while under the tyrannic rule of Firaun and his men. The Night is referred herein is to make known to us that it is during the night that Allah forgives and purifies our hearts of all the sins we commit during the day, and removes our enmity against one another, soothes our hearts from anger and apprehension. And bestows upon us the peace, and puts us to rest in a deep, wonderful sleep only to raise us up in the early hours with all freshness and bloom of a new heavens and the earth. Thus our lives start from the dusk with the purification of our hearts during our rest and sleep. And with the dawning, there is the refreshing breath, (i.e.) new lease of life generated from the Ruh of Allah, for newer experiences every day. Thus according to the covenant that Allah made with Musa, the powers of the days and the nights refreshes a human mind, fine-tuning his acumen. He increases our perception in the Unseen wisdom with Holiness embracing our minds. Allah encompassed the people of Israel with His Mercy and Grace for their patience and faith that they exhibited even while under severe persecution by Firaun’s men; and, as a reward, God bestowed upon them His grace in a measure unmatched to that Allah had ever graced with any people on the earth. And this is the reason for their advanced intelligence above the rest of the population of the world.
       	But the Israelites became ingrate and arrogant, and harboured in their minds devilry against the people, standing tall over them, denying and belying Allah. But Allah forgave them and continued pardoning them all through the thirty nights; and, further, ten more nights did Allah add to give them new wisdom and stable power so that they give thanks to Allah. But, to the contrary, they grew worse in their arrogance, and they took to the calf as their deity. And Allah bestowed more and more amnesty. Allah is the MostKind, the Most Tolerant. His kindness and tolerance are there for everyone, but their increase and decrease in them lies in their show of gratitude to the Most Gracious, during the testing times. Allah is ever Appreciative of such qualities, in His bondmen, and that He Relents with tolerance and patience through their errors, violations and sins. A classic example to this is the forgiveness and tolerance that Allah exhibits towards the descendants of Israel despite their continued aggression and oppressive behaviour and their plots and devising against the peaceful people of the world. They are under the illusion they are the chosen people, by the God in this world; and, they covet them to be above all the people, for all time to come. Hence the hallucinatory role of the descendants of Israel in this world would continue for some more time until clear evidence is shown through the chosen people from the oppressed sections of the people today, whom they belied and denigrated as worthless creatures. Their time is nearing, and the change is in the offing (3.140). 
	(41). [2.54] The people of Musa were of the fear that killing their calf, their deity, - would cast bad omen upon them; and, Musa said to them, “Then sacrifice the calf (2.67 – 71) you revere much.” And they did give up the calf half-heartedly, after much argument over it with Musa. Thus Allah forgave the descendants of Israel and continued favouring them, mercifully. Nothing evil befell them on account of their calf-sacrifice.
    	(42). [2.55] Musa could not answer them but to turn to Allah Himself and said, “O my God, I must see Thou with my eyes; show Thou to me (7.143).” Then when Allah made it clear to Him it is impossible, Musa sought forgiveness from Allah and strengthened him as a Muslim, who shall believe in the Unseen. And when he came to his people from his retreat, he saw his people worshipping the calf again, this time making the calf into an idol that they sacrificed earlier. And an argument ensued between Musa and the idolaters when finally, the thunder-rent gripped the idolaters until they were dead.
        	(43). [2.57] Mannu-Salwa is the foods that are pure; the sustenance that Allah created and sent upon them from the skies and what Allah produced forth for them from the earth that gave their heart peace and solace; and,have given their body, the health and comfort. So eat of the fair foods that provide you such pleasure with a lively feeling.
   	(44). [2.58] Let this be the prayer of each of us when we enter the dining room.
        	(45). [2.59] Famine and scarcity struck them on account of their wrongdoings. Musa turned to Allah seeking forgiveness for them to save them from the torment of the scorching heaven.
    	(46). [2.60] The reason for famine and drought is due to our forgetfulness of the prayer while entering the dining hall: “O, Allah! Forgive and lessen the burden of our sins.” And any good provision as food and water and air from Allah is for you, and for others too; the mischievous Satanic force inside us will say: why should we give the food and water to others? But if we keep guard on us, and spare our godly provisions to others also, the torrents from above, and there will be springs gushing forth from under the ground while the rivers flow beneath us as well by His Grace (67.30). Do not hoard and sell the food and water for money and make the affluent population deprived of them. But because the governments deliberately operate such heinous crimes against its people and the people have subjected themselves to the atrocities, Allah separated the heavens and the earth far apart so that the rain has stopped and the earth has sucked away the land’s water table. O, people! Seek forgiveness from your God for this, and Allah is sure to give rain and produce, in a measure, plenteous (11.52). 
	(47). [2.61] If we are believers in the prophets, the messengers and those who were dead or killed in the cause of Allah, are not to be considered as the dead. They are all alive, and they are given beautiful provisions and are honoured ones with Allah. When we cast falsehood on the Quran, or belie its Signs, it amounts to giving the lies to the Prophets and denying the Messages of Allah. And, it is likening to killing all the Prophets and the Messengers alive, all the time (2.91). They are the cursed people ever till the Final Hour.
        	(48). [2.63] Allah has raised ‘Thur’ above us before taking the covenant. The Covenant has the following agreement: we shall have a firm hold on to what Allah had given to us over it. It is not ‘A mountain’. But a word of promise of great propositions from Allah that you will have power over the skies and the earth and everything in between. And, by Allah's grace, you will live in all the benefits and beauty it holds for you, and in the bountiful splendour, He has showered upon it for you. Everything in it shall listen to the aspiration in your heart and echo them in their produces for you (34.10). And in whichever place your hearts wish a thing, however small or big, the heavens and the earth shall come together and produce it then and there. When you need a spacious pathway up the mountain, it shall pave the way for you; all the splendour and beauty must flourish in their varieties according to your will in the Name of Allah - it must resound you. You can make the mountains displace by His leave (13.31), and make them fly and disperse them like the dispersion of clouds (27.88) into thin winds. You shall throw the mountains up in the sky and make them bang into each other and fall in a heap of sand and dust and spread it up without its ups and downs thus erasing the very traces of their existence before. And you raise your plains into mountains that shall obey your wish, in the Name of Allah. 
    	And thus, if you are a believer, believe that you need Allah for the wishful liveliness for your willful and obedient heart into which He had already breathed His Ruh, as His Wish and Will. And in the Name of Allah, the whole world, the skies and the earth shall echo it in our service and with subservience. Henceforth, have a firm hold on to the ‘Thur’ - The covenant of Thur.
        	(49). [2.64] Because of your recklessness about the ‘Thur’ and the covenant with Allah, we face on the earth tremendous challenges and hardships in our lives which otherwise should have been reduced to dust. We are losing our gracious, God-bestowed lives steadily to a mean and a miserable disposition. Even the hard mountainous cancer tissues should be thrown to the winds like cotton (27.88; 101.5) clouds, in the Name of Allah. Be the believers in the Thur and the Covenant. If we fail to believe in and honour the covenant we have made with Allah, it is like inviting His curse upon us. Then we descend from the status of man to the state of animals. 
	(50). [2.65] The verses of The Book, is a glad tidings and a warning for all people of all the worlds.
    (51). [2.67] Refer to ayah (2.51)  super fix number (40).
    (52). [2.71] If only we make such sacrifices of the cattle for feeding the haves and the have-nots, we shall have the proper mental state with humaneness and wisdom to honour humankind above anything. As humans that we are, we shall not be hunting, and preying upon one another for our very survival and living; nor do we prowl for our thriving.
    (53). [2.73] A group of people killed a man, and later they tried to accuse one another. In such instances, Allah’s sense comes through; each one involved in the offence is guilty of the crime. Punish each of them with the likeness of their crime they jointly committed – Life for life, eye for an eye, nose for nose, and ear for ear, a tooth for a tooth, and wound for wound and blood for blood (5.45). That is the judgement of Allah if you want a peaceful living from the deadly existence.
	(54). [2.74] The heart is meant to receive the blessings, good news and warnings of Allah through the sense and feel. Heart shall not bear anything with form and shape, for it is sure a burden to it. The heart by way of its comprehension has to extract the quintessence of every creation and feel the life and liveliness of the universe as a whole. It is not meant for bearing in one’s heart everything in created manifestations, and to study the physical nature of all of its visible things. It is a heaviness to the heart, making it hard as a rock. The more you possess the knowledge of the exterior appearance without the life and liveliness of a thing created by God, the worse is your mental ability to spread and expand to imbibe the limitless vastness of God’s generousness. Such people cannot be believers.
	(55). [2.76] Allah strictly warns that the believers should not fall apart with differences due to envy, from the Straight Path (6.159). But they deferred and broke into various sections, arguing over the Book, which Allah has sent down as the Guidance to all humanity. 
	(56). [2.80] Sad enough, most ‘muslims’ sternly believe in this falsehood that their clerics lie to them as from Allah; and, they read it out to ‘their Muslims’ from the Books they wrote against His Verses, with their hands and make them believe they were from Allah. 
    (57). [2.85] The people who were driven out of their homes through oppression fought with just resistance against the oppressors for as long as they could; but they were weakened by the transgression, and made them surrender to their will - that they treated them as downtrodden and lowly people before them. That was their ransom - as part of their compensation for the crime of resisting them. And they deprive them of whatever little they possess. They did not fear God. Their return is, to a painful doom for God is ever watchful of what they do.
    (58). [2.87] The killing of the Prophets and the Messengers shall not be construed as the physical elimination, but it is the desecration of their mission, the Message brought to them by the Prophets and the Messengers.
    (59). [2.88] It is because they cried lies on the truth and killed their conscience in their breasts, the God inscribed Book. In the real sense, it amounted to killing the Angel-Messengers in their Ruh, the Guardian of the Message of Allah. So, in the absence of the guidance from their Soul, the Conscience, they shall never be able to see their follies, nor shall they hear the glad tidings and warnings of Allah anymore from their Angel-Messengers. Upon the vision of these, is the veil, the curse of Allah; and, they are the companions of Shaitan (43.36). 
    (60). [2.89] The RUH of Allah as your conscience is what you know as the Soul. From birth, it guides you to your victory, and ever present with you as a certain witness, which would establish that the Command of success against all evil is from the Scripture of Allah (4.82). Believe in the Angel-Messengers’ guidance in your RUH, and follow and abide by their warnings. The Angel-Messengers are the Ruh-ul-Quddus(Jibreel) and the Ruh-ul-Amin(Mikhail).
    (61). [2.90] The envious heart is the most disparaging curse any one shall incur upon himself for it is the most hateful before Allah as it arises as a result of the outright denial of Allah’s judgement and a reward for His chosen bondmen. Envy is the Satanic invasion and destruction of one’s mind so that he shall never receive Allah’s mercy and forgiveness, but invite the wrath of Allah. 
	(62). [2.91] Allah says to the believers, “Consider not the Prophets and the Messengers as dead, for they are alive with Allah. They are being fed and honoured by Allah, and will ever be living.” The killing of the Prophets and the Messengers shall not be construed as the physical elimination, but it is the desecration of their mission, the Message brought to them by the Prophets and the Messengers.
		And their mission, for having been chosen for humanity, would continue till the world comes to an end. So, it is akin to that we kill all the Prophets and Messengers alive even as they live amongst us today when we disbelieve in the Messages(2.61, 154, 3.21) and the Scripture Allah sent with them. All the Prophets have come to their brethren(people), with the following admonition: “I am a Messenger and a Warner from Allah, the God of the worlds; there is no God for you but Him; so fear Allah and behave.” Since all the Prophets are not dead and are alive with us, and for the people of all the worlds, their warnings hold right till the Day of Resurrection. If we want good things to happen in this life for us, then we shall surely know all good comes only from Allah (4.79). Then we shall not worship or desire the worldly things, the men and the matters, but be wishful of what Allah will create for you as new creations in the heavens and the earth, filling up all in between. If we associate people, and desire their materials, and worship all their means in this earthly life, then it amounts to killing all the Prophets alive every day of our life by belying them all. You cannot kill them for they are ever living. For instance the Prophet Ayyub: He believed and prostrated to Allah for his long-drawn ailments; and, Allah cured him and delivered him of all his adversities. And thus Prophet Ayyub did live as a witness unto the people not to associate or believe or worship the doctors as curers of your diseases (21.83, 84;  38.41). But claiming us to be Muslims, and then going to doctors to save our lives, we belie the Prophet Ayyub and kill him and his Mission in this world. And, Prophet Ibrahim said, “When I am suffering from diseases it is Allah who cures me (26.80).” As a Muslim and a believer of the Prophet Ibrahim, we belie the Prophet Ibrahim and kill him and his mission alive when we seek the doctors and fall into their hands to save our lives.  
    (63). [2.93] Because of their disobedience and differing, Allah had turned their hearts away from His commands (7.146) Evil is what they worship and evil is what they would look up to.
    (64). [2.97] Allah has created two important entities in the breasts of human beings: one, is the mind and the other, is the Soul. The Soul is the RUH breathed into our breasts at birth, as Furqan by Allah, which shapes up our mind to perfection in perception. The Furqan is the Revelation that clarifies between the right and the wrong concerning any event that occurs in the heavens and on the earth about us and all through our lives. The Revelation that any event, happening around us, and what has to come to pass in the future because either of the kindness we have for, or the evil we plot against humanity, is Furqan. If evil is what we plan today, then Furqan is the warning, but if we do a goodly work, then Furqan gives the glad tiding and the guidance to our promised future, abundant in Allah’s Grace.
        	There are the chosen ones as Prophets and Messengers from among the men and from among the malayika (22.75; 41.3O, 31) to guide the people of the world. Furqan is entrusted with the chosen Messengers from among the Malayika, the Angel-Messengers Jibreel(Ruh ul Quddus) and Mikhail(Ruh ul Amin). At birth, Allah breathes in our heart, His Ruh, The Furqan. And Allah entrusts the Angel-Messenger Jibreel(2.97, 98) with the Furqan’s clairvoyance, who would Reveal to the people of the Quran through the Enlightenment of the Distinguishing Furqan. Mostly, that becomes our conscience which always speaks the truth and warns oneself of his evil. The function of the conscience is to forbid us what is sinful and to allow us what is righteous. The Angel-Messenger Jibreel is the purest entity that guides us from our Ruh, (i.e.) from our Soul. The Messenger is Ruh ul Quddus, Jibreel. 
    	Soulful adherence to the glad tidings, and to fear the warnings as the Angel-Messenger Jibreel delivers to us from the Furqan by the command of Allah is the pre-requisite of a man if he wishes to be a ‘Believer’ in Allah. Now Allah asks who the enemy to Jibreel (2.97, 98), i.e., his Conscience is?
    (65). [2.98] Jibreel is the pure soul, the Ruh ul Quddus who delivers the revelation from the Furqan in the Ruh to the mind as commanded by Allah, thus keeping up one’s conscience alive. The Angel-Prophet Mikhail is the Ruh ul Amin who gives solace to our heart, strengthening our Iman and making our feet firm through the righteous conduct in our worldly life. To the contrary, if we take the misconduct then we are the disbelievers of Allah and killers of even the Angel-Prophets Jibreel and Mikhail.
    (66). [2.99] Here we understand the word, the plural “We” as that which includes: Allah, His Angels, His Messengers, the Angel-Prophets, Jibreel and Mikhail with us, as the centre point. We shall understand this “We” throughout the Quran in this manner. 
    (67). [2.102] The Kingdom of Sulaiman was profusely studded with the powers of varying ranks and order from the skies to the earth. He possessed the powers of the birds, the ants, the termites and much more from Allah. And, their languages were taught to Sulaiman that helped him to communicate and command them at his will; the mountains bowed to him; and, the iron would become soft, and the brass would melt by his will; such, and much more were with Sulaiman that Allah alone knows what they were. Sulaiman’s assembly included the angels, the jinns, the living - and the martyrs, the ones who completed their lives in this world as His Signs. Such of them are those who have been raised as the truthful, as the believing, as the good doers, as the helpers in the cause of Allah (4.69). We shall not address them as dead for they are all His Live-Signs (3.169; 41.31), invisible to the living mortals - as witnesses, as helpers and as proofs of Allah. Sulaiman was using all his means at his command with the wisdom of Allah, making his people aspire for the Wisdom to know and believe in Allah, so that they may take to the luminous way wishfully. Sulaiman never used physical force (2.256)  upon his people to make them comply with his will, for force is not righteous before Allah. His vast Kingdom was the perfect exemplar to the Islamic Rule. In his extensive empire, most people fell to Shaitan's inducements and thus were the rejecters of faith. Sulaiman’s Kingdom has been the only Islamic Nation the world could ever have witnessed. Anyone can easily say that Sulaiman could not exercise power over his people, or he was soft on disbelievers, or that he was afraid of them. But Allah ascertains Sulaiman had never been a disbeliever. But the people were, who followed what Shaitan had whispered to them.
	(68). [2.102] In Sulaiman's empire, there was this city called Babyl, infested with the people involved in sorcery and black magic. Since Sulaiman was never to use force, which is unIslamic, he demonstrated to them the Signs of Allah in truth to beat out the black magic. Sulaiman chose two angels from his assembly of Malayika, namely Harut and Marut, who by Sulaiman’s command descended on the people of Babyl; they came before them in perfect human form. The Sign of Allah they possessed with them is the wisdom to bring together the spouses who fell apart and that they would unite the divided family. But the miscreants, the sorcerers and the disbelievers thought they could use the same to cause division between the spouses and in the families. There was a severe test for the disbelieving people in what the angels Harut and Marut brought with them for a good cause.
    (69). [2.102] The sorcerers and the disbelieving people came to know the fast spreading news and the names of the two Malayika, Harut and Marut, having unique powers to bring together the husband and wife to a strong affinity and to unite the divided families. The disbelievers and the miscreants began to contemplate on misusing this power to its opposite effect using their wisdom of Harut and Marut. The sorcerers and the criminals approached the two, and pleaded with them to teach them their powers, feigning before them that they too would be of help to the people, if only they teach them what they knew.
   	(70). [2.102] The angels knew them well and warned them of their evil and the doom if they ever abused it. They gave false promises to the angels Harut and Marut and forcibly learnt it from them.
    (71). [2.102] Finally, what the sorcerers of the Babyl learnt from Harut and Marut did not profit them, and they became the victims of their vices. What an abominable evil that they had wrought selling their souls!
    (72). [2.103] Those who are evil-minded and wrong-doers shall have to keep in mind this now: in whoever's mind is the evil working, they only invite doom upon them; but if they guard them against it, then their reward is perpetual blessings from Allah.
    (73). [2.104] Allah has sent to every community in the world the messengers as a guide and a Warner who brings glad tidings to the people from Allah. Whoever listens to them with humility and acts accordingly they are the guided ones. But there are the disbelieving, defying and self-styled leaders in each community who misguide the people from their God and deviate them from the Blessed path.
    (74). [2.106] Allah does not change an ayat per se but brings about a change in the understanding and comprehension of any of the ayats by elevating the perceptibility of the humble, enduring and obedient people, living in a given testing period in their lives. There are the chosen messengers from among them, who would guide them from the same verses or ayats of Quran, which gave a meaning different to that which existed before, according to the level of their standards and perception. For example, there are so many ayats that say about the war, jihad, etc. The war aforetimes is not the war of today; Today, in the most troublesome nuclear era, the war will be over at the press of a button, and within seconds populations will be erased from the surface of the earth. So what do war and jihad mean today? And how to take the meanings of the words of the ayat that it should be gotten from a better perception. Patience, tolerance and endurance will beat the ferocity and fierceness of those possessing the criminal nuclear powers. Thus, through this verse (2.106), Allah says He is with us to elevate our ranks in perceiving His ayats from higher propositions. From this ayat, we understand we shall not go by the verbose, human-made dictionary meanings for the words of the ayats, but by the sense of the ayat. One's sensibility is all-important to get guidance from the ayats of Quran during the changing times of every individual. And, according to each one’s capacity, every single ayat or verse shall have to give billions of individually varying comprehensions. If there are 8 billion people, and if they wish to be individuals, then they shall soulfully turn to Allah for His guidance.  And Allah is All-Knowing and has power over all things from the heavens to the earth and everything in between.
   	(75). [2.107] Our lives are designed to exist between the skies and the earth. Without the grace of Allah descending on the earth, the earth cannot give life to a single organism. Above all that we consider as the life sources such as the air, water and light, the WORD of Allah, permeating them all, as the inherent and dynamic life force of inspiration for each of the humankind must be continually imbibed and conceived by our bosoms to raise us to the nearness of Godliness!
	(76). [2.108] The more the questions we ask our conscience, the answer we get from it guides us to the belief; to the contrary, the more we put our questions to the people around, the guidance is not from your nature. Therefore, the answer could be just the instructions without a definite direction. They are the unfounded knowledge of arrogance.
	(77). [2.109] The men appointed imams, clergy and the religious leaders all over the world are the people of the scripture today; Allah warns us about them and commands us to stay clear of them.
	(78). [2.113] Here is the severe warning from Allah to all religious sections whether they belong to the groups called Mumins, or the Jews, or the Christians or the Other divisions. But only those who believe in the God of the universes, who wish good for others, and who fear His justice alone are on the right path that would make them reach the promised heaven.
	(79). [2.114] If we are sincere in our gratitude to Allah, we shall know it is Him who gives us shelter in this world for our living, and therefore all our houses are His. Our duty therein is to remember Allah’s Names more and more and obey surrendering entirely to His Will. The houses of such people are Holy Places or Masjids. Anyone who enters such holy places or mosques, (i.e.) the houses of the believers and indulges in arguments over their obeisance to Allah and the verses of Quran, is the spoiler. 
	(80). [2.115] Allah is a keen watcher, faces us whichever direction we turn to. So fear His presence, obey His command and prostrate to His Will; and, that is being prayerful anytime. In our ritual prayers we turn to the direction of the Qa’ba alone; but if we are prayerful, in every direction we see His Countenance, Who takes us to the immense expanse of His abundant Grace.  
    (81). [2.117] Every good thing we receive in our mind from our RUH is the word, ‘Be!’ from the Creator, Allah. Since His Origination does not have the source, any of His Creation is first of its kind and does not have a prior example. It is impossible to imagine His Word as a visible thing, for His creations are the Signs of His Presence. And it is a blessing, a word of good omen from Allah, that cannot be viewed or imagined from our knowledge, in form or shape; nor could it be conceived as an idea even. For every word of Allah, breathed into each soul as one’s inspiration is a new creation, decreed for a time in his future, near or far. You have to believe in this Unknown and Unseen Word of Wisdom from Allah. We are to be grateful for the good news sent down upon us. If we ever imagine the good news to be the one that we know of already, then we have falsely believed a creation in form. That is the starting point of becoming an idolater, and that is a severe blow we await for us in the future, near or far.  It is a deception we have imposed upon us. Our sin is that we chase our deception as our ultimate goal in our life; but, the truth is that we serve a ghost, all our future. Doing so, we have stepped out of the Truth, obeying law and order of an immoral society - this is an unpardonable sin against one's conscience. Allah says it is a grave sin He does not forgive unless we correct our ways by our good-selves, the Conscience. And so we lose not out on the Word, the good news inspired in our bosoms, by the leave of Allah. He intends a beautiful life for us and inspires us with a ‘Be!’ And it is all set to become into ‘Being’. And the atmosphere abounding with the blissful nature and force, distinct for each of us, who believed in the Word, is in the process of its making, encompassing us by its Unseen Power. Thus, we have already started breathing the Power in from the environment embracing us, evolving and transforming us as a new creation ourselves. We emerge as a model of believers in the Unseen, living in the timeless of our spacious future. Thus Allah speaks to us, sending down upon us His Word of Creation as  Signs of His Unseen Grace in our every inspiration, as long as we are enlivening us, breathing in His communication, not rejecting. 
	(82). [2.118] So we do take care not to speak of or follow the tales of the people of aforetimes, and not to follow the teachings of the ‘religious leaders’, and not to submit to the compulsions of our forefathers; and, shun the callous attitude of the majority of the religious sections around us.
	(83). [2.121] The most hateful in the eyes of Allah is when we recite unto others that which we do not practice and stand a witness to what we preach; unless a preacher himself is a beneficiary of a sign from Allah, it is not upon him to inform of the verses of the Book.
	(84). [2.123] Every moment of each day passes by the judgement of God upon each soul; each has its account to be settled; none can either intercede for or help another, however closely related they are. That is because each one shall only live by the account of his deeds.
    (85). [2.124] The tests that Allah made Ibrahim undergo were: the fire into which Ibrahim is to be thrown, but by the leave of Allah, the fire withdrew its heat from Ibrahim, and he was comforted with its coolness. And whenever he got ill, he never believed in the healers and curers among men but turned to Allah, and Allah cured him of his distresses on all occasions. He was made free of the serious charges of blasphemy when he broke the statues and the idols of their deities. He did this to win a dispute against the ideology of the idolaters  – all these, and much more were the tests that Ibrahim was able to win over by the leave of Allah. And Allah granted such victories to Ibrahim against the disbelievers due to his unfailing faith in Allah alone, without associations to Him. Certainly, Allah was well pleased with His bondman, Ibrahim, as He conferred him with the leadership to guide his people in Faith. 
	(86). [2.125]  House denotes each one’s house, as a God-given shelter for the living, and for protection from all evil. The people who take refuge in their houses shall remember their God, always circumventing Him in gratitude for such a blessing;, and they show absolute obedience to the command of God while peacefully living in their houses, with humility. Such abiding people, always keep visiting such houses of other bondsmen of Allah; and, Allah ordains upon each of us to keep their God-given house - His house, clean and render it pure for those like them who are constant in visiting “The Houses”.
	(87). [2.125] The way we follow is the standpoint of Ibrahim who never committed shirk in his entire life.
    (88). When there are blessed people in any place or town or city, Allah allows the fruits bestowed upon them to be of benefit to the rejecters too, for a period prescribed. The rejecters could reminisce and return to Allah with gratitude during this time or let them go astray; after that, their life is the punishment of hellfire.
	(89). [2.126] This shall have to be the prayer of every follower of Ibrahim and Ismail when they raise their houses. Allah surely Hears what our hearts speak to us; and, He knows the best means to fulfil and deliver our needs placed before Him. 
	(90). [2.128] We shall never call ourselves Muslims but stay humble and be prayerful to God that He makes us of Muslims; and, seek from Him to teach us how to pray to Him so that we receive His Forgiveness and Mercy all our lives.
	(91). [2.129] In our present situation, every nation needs such a messenger with a soul chosen by Allah, as a model before us, for none knows the Book, its Clarity, its Signs; the above prayer should be the prayer of each of us, until the end of the world.
	(92). [2.130] Ibrahim was chosen for the entire world as the all time living model as to how to lead a life with utmost patience and without associating partners to Allah; unless one follows the Prophet Ibrahim in what he stood for, in this world, he is debased and despised in both the worlds. 
	(93). [2.133] The conscience in each one’s RUH is his Godsend grace and guidance to him; follow and worship the guidance of Allah therein. That is the path of God and our forefathers’ – Ibrahim, Ismail, Ishaq and Yaqub.
	(94). [2.134] None will be questioned regarding the act of another; each one is answerable to his deeds. In each one’s RUH are the angel messengers Ruh ul Quddus and Ruh ul Amin namely, Jibreel and Mikhail. They are the helpers and protectors by the leave of Allah each one who is in the path of God, i.e., he who fears his conscience in all his deeds. The following communities deviated from their conscience and followed the avarice of the people at large, who got divided into the religions such as Jews and Christians and then, into various sects leaving the straight path of Ibrahim, Ismail and Ishaq as enemies unto Jibreel and Mikhail.
	(95). [2.135] Allah certifies Ibrahim for his uprightness and purity in surrendering to Allah alone, without associating partners with Him. Since Allah does not forgive the sin of association, it is mandatory that we follow Ibrahim as the prophet and as a messenger to keep us on the straight path –  the standpoint of Ibrahim. 
	(96). [2.136] We shall believe only in Allah and what Allah Reveals to each of us individually of His Book.. And, we shall never follow or adhere to the understanding of the individual opinions of any person, or any leader of any group, or any religious head of any section – on any particular verse of the Book of Allah. The verses of the Book is for the individuals to apply their minds individually to each of their situations for specific guidance therefrom, by turning to Allah alone, the Revealer of the verses of the Book. The verses of the Book are sure guidance in any situation, in an individual’s life. In each one's life, the situation is discreetly different to that of another, and no two lives are similar at any given point; and, between any two consecutive moments, the situations are not the same in the same individual. Allah is All-Prevailing, All-Knowing and none shall reveal as what Allah delivers.
	(97). [2.136]  But following the misinterpretation of another besides the only guidance from Allah for His Book, has led to inventions of various scriptures by men – all in the names of the prophets such as the Rabbi, the Bible and the Hadith; and, they developed different religions and various rituals to worship God. Thus, they created in the hearts of the ignorant masses, differences between the prophets, with the help of false scriptures written by men. 
		Therefore, whoever believes in Allah will be able to see and pick up the words and the verses of Allah from every scripture in the world discarding the men injected words and sentences from them all. Before touching any scripture seek refuge in Allah from all the evils in the heart. If this shall be our way, we will not find any discrepancy between the verses of any two scriptures, and we will not find differences between any two prophets. 
	(98). [2.143] The well-known direction we are charged with is, turning our hearts towards our souls, i.e., the RUH. And establish faith in Allah, without keeping elements of association with Him; this course is not easy at all for all, except to those who Allah had guided. 
	(99). [2.144] The Will of Allah descends upon each one’s RUH in the heart as His command which Allah makes his dearest wish as his life’s attainment and fulfilment. So may all your attention be turned towards Godsend Will in your RUH, the Sanctum Sanctorum of each one. Guard the Will of future, against the desires of the worldly pleasures, humanity follows. All that Allah would wish to see in us is if we have our “Willingness towards His Will”, with belief, and strengthen it further by entrusting our responsibility with Him as His since Allah is the Best of all the trustees. And, He will surely be appreciative of the work of those who put their trust in Him, in the first. But to the contrary, those who would take the strides upon themselves, believing in their ability above Allah, they are arrogant although they knew from the Book that it would invite upon them the wrath of Allah. Surely He would make their works go astray.
	(100). [2.145] Allah’s Will or His Command upon each one’s RUH is distinct. Each one’s Will is discreet; and, no two Will is equal between two individuals; and, in each, His Will is ever evolving; and thus between any two moments the Will transforms and never is the same in the same individual. Its evolution or devolution depends upon the purity of the heart, steadfastness in faith and Willful surrendering before his God in abject humility. The Will of Allah is full of Wisdom and complete with its Signs. It does not have any strategic direction for us to turn. Rather it draws all heavenly ways towards our RUH, with every Sign of the Wisdom of the Book upon those who observe patience and those who are tolerant. And those who are, in all humility, surrender to the Will of God, and in total acceptance of the unseen power, to him, shall ‘His Will’ come into being as a new creation. Such new creations will be high above in its Wisdom and fruitfulness in contrast to the scientific inventions of the followers of the books. other than The Book, having only the materialistic amalgamations, without life in it.
	(101). [2.146] The truth and the Signs of the Book have been denied to the people of the Book by the priesthood who lied to them not to try to understand it nor should they seek to comprehend it on their own. The clergy knows the truth that God guides whom He will; yet they denied the common man, his direct access to the Book.
    (102). [2.147] So believe not the priesthood but read the Book in the Name of The Revealer; recite it in the Name of The Reminder; and, rehearse the Book in the Name of the Guide. He is the only One, who makes us a believer in Him, and in His Truth.
   	(103). [2.148] The direction to which we face is towards where our Will is and where our needs are fulfilled. Our needs are the dearest wishes that which God by His Will sends down upon His RUH, in each of our hearts. His Ruh is the Sacred House on which descends the word of promise from Allah, as His Will that which becomes our Wishful Need. We are ordained to have a fast hold on to that which God had sent down upon us with firm faith in Him; this is absolute surrender to the command of your Ruh or your Soul. And prostration to His Will is what God expects from us. Now your face turns towards the Sacred Mosque, the abode of your God’s Command, and so race forth to it in total humility. 
    (104). [2.149] ‘Ruh’ is the ’Soul’ of a person wherein God’s Command and His Will descend; and from where the conscience arises in us as a sure guidance in righteousness so that we reach our destination, the Command in our Sacred Ruh, the Soul. If we follow the Ruh and abide by our conscience, our abode is with the God’s Soul; or else, we shall be astray and wander about with the chaotic mind.
    (105). [2.150] The evil ones and the miscreants should be a witness to your righteousness and steadfast adherence to your conscience as commanded by your Ruh. It will make the wrong doers lose all hopes of winning with their evil arguments against you.  
	(106). [2.151] Every messenger is empowered with wisdom and enlightenment so that no miscreant from any part of the world could ever win over with their arguments, the message and it’s clear Signs that Allah had sent with them (25.33; 48.28).
	(107). [2.152] Allah always remembers us and is ever watchful over us; but only if we remember Him, he gets very close to us.
    (108). [2.153] ‘Prayer’ is submitting and surrendering to the Will of God with which He commands us through His Ruh or Soul He has breathed into our breasts at birth; and, it is from this point our life-breath started, and our life began in peace. God’s Will for us is to safeguard the Peace or Salam He has breathed into our Ruh as His Trust, by submitting and putting the Trust back in His hands. God loves those who put their Trust in Him (3.159) so that Shaitan or the evil forces cannot near the Trust intended for you, in any way. The Ruh is always inspired as a beautiful tiding from Allah for a colourful life. Our Prayer is to seek for belief in it so that we revere in the thought as if it has blossomed before us for good. We always revere God thankful for having given the inspiration, for His promise never fails as long as we do not fail Him by doubting His inspiration. Patience is all-important for the completion of prayer, with the salam or peace. In prayer, we have to ensure God is with us, and the way to keep God with us is by the observance of patience. God is with those who are patient. Patience is prayer. In such Prayerfulness, you shall not turn your face to God, but be with God and make God be with you. The end part of any prayer is God given Salam or Peace. As long as we are peaceful, it means God is with us and that we are to be in constant prayerfulness so that He is ever in our presence. That is the essence of Prayer.
    (109). [2.154] This verse informs us that all the Prophets, the Messengers, the Truthful, the Helpers, the Martyrs and the righteous, and all those who were raised by God as Witnesses are alive and are with us, living (4.69). We pray and say, “O God, make us live in the company of good doers. And make us Muslims and as servants of God.” We are to live with them to stay free from the inducements and influences of the Shaitans. If we wish to live with the prophets, then we abide by His Ruh or Command, which guides each one through his Conscience, the real witness to the Scriptures. Only now you will be able to follow all the Prophets and all the Messengers. Rejecting this truth means denying Allah, His prophets and the messengers; and, turning away from them is akin to killing them all alive (2.61, 91).        
    (110). [2.155] The sense of fear is only a test from Allah – as a warning, and as a sign of poverty and hunger, so near; and fear of the losses of the fruits of our properties and lives. The tragedy has not touched us yet, but the warning is alive in our heart, ticking. The only way to get rid of the impending disaster is to not to race towards it in our minds but listen to the words of Allah from our Ruh that says, “Seek forgiveness, and the Most Merciful will forgive you; ask Patience from the Most Tolerant; Allah is with you.” The more tolerant we are, the nearer we belong to Allah.
    (111). [2.158] The word ‘sign or symbol’ signifies not what exists, but refers to something else to be inferred through pondering and perception. Safa and Marwa refer to these beautiful qualities of mind that would raise one’s standard to mountainous proportions; and, Safa and Marwa are the symbols, then they do not refer to the physical walking between the two mountains bearing these names. When most do this exercise physically and materially without the touch of mind, Allah says that it is no blame on them for they are ignorant masses and thus have not edged out on arrogance. They are pardoned for they are trying to understand now and then the symbols and signs of Allah. Allah is ever Appreciative of these “Repeated Visits” to their own Ruh in their pondering.
	(112). [2.158] “Wish of the House – Hajj of the House '' The House is our Ruh, the Sacred place wherein we shall abide as long as we live by His Will; and, it is the Ruh wherefrom we start our journey on our wishful life by His Leave. All our life it is such a pilgrimage or holy journey through, by the blissful moments. 	That is the Sign or the Symbol of Allah, which lifts a believer to a higher level of clarity when he wishes to undertake the Hajj of the House or the Wish of the House as he frequents his visits to the symbols of Allah through pondering. As they perceive the Unseen Signs with certainty, their faith strengthens further in their rise to their eternal glory, in the straight path.
	(113). [2.159] The priesthood at large is that which by its audacity concealed the scripture from the people from the time immemorial. Then with Allah’s is the only refuge.
    (114). [2.160] Forgiveness is from Allah alone; likewise, the enlightenment, clarity and reform are also from only Allah; Unless we gain clarity of thought through the use of our criterion or the distinguishing ability, there is no question of reformation in us. The prerequisite for one’s reform is forgiveness from God. Without using our God endowed criterion to get into the straight path, and blindly following the perplexity of the priesthood, then it is like ignoring the God. Thus we should not reject being prayerful to God all the time, directly and personally; and shall not fall prey to, and follow the chaos of the majority men. 
    (115). [2.161] We shall follow Allah directly avoiding the guidance of the middlemen until we die to save us from the curse of Allah, and of the malayika and of all the men. And if we turn away from the straight path, we will be a cursed one.
    (116). [2.162] Diseases and poverty have almost gripped the entire world population; the situation is worsening, and the sufferings are increasing by the day; today there is no hope for us to save us from every affliction of man's inventions. 
    (117). [2.164] There are at least nine signs from Allah in the above verse, for the individuals to ponder while seeking the Revelation from God direct, and not to turn to hearsay from men of worldly knowledge. We shall not set up anyone or anything as equals to the Pondering for which, Allah alone is the Revealer of the secrets of His creations.     
	(118). [2.165] And on the Hour each one is for himself, and all the connections between them and their setups would vanish.
	(119). [2.166] No amount of regret or repentance would help one on that day, but only the curse from Allah surrounds each one.
    (120). [2.167] Now is the chance, well before the Hour – to save us from the hellfire. Every living being has its life, and they are to turn towards their food, the life source God has produced from the earth in abundance for each life. Only after bestowing and fulfilling His Abundance on the earth for each being, has He placed humans as a guest of honour upon this earth. We must honour and praise God of the universes and humble us before Him in total acceptance that we are neither their producers nor the creators but Him. We should not hold control over the sources of life, i.e., the food, water and air that we shall sell them for money. It is precisely here the shaitan’s business comes into play – money, water and air for food! Shaitans had marketed the practice of finance as an institution making free food-distribution unlawful, and eating food without money is the worst of all crime! Until we distribute the God created food freely and bring the practice to the right course, no food is pure. The diktat shall be: the heinous of all crimes is the selling of food or water. Such offence shall be severely punishable.
    (121). [2.168] Shaitan taught man the business and made men the busybodies. He does all business for money-earning, and the money is rendered necessary to procure the life source, the food and water. Though we know well the food is produced by God for all living beings on the earth in abundance so that there is not a living creature for which Allah has disowned responsibility (11.6). Shaitan’s invention of business and money are indeed the evil institution into the soul of human beings, in open defiance to Allah’s Grace and Benevolence. A curse and doom are upon them who defies Allah and denies the food and water to humans. He who sells the life-source of man for a mean price, the money, the curse be on him. Since the money that Shaitan invented is held above the produce of Allah as the very base of life, we face hell here in this worldly life itself. Money is the root-cause for the holocausts. The best we can do to save us from this shaitan-infested, money-oriented disastrous populace is to distribute the God-given food! God created the food for us, and Shaitan introduced the money to prevent us from reaching out to the food. Giving alms is not spending the money but distribution of food to the hungry and the needy. Poverty shall never be removed until the God given life-source, the food and the water, and that we dare not sell it for money. Thus we have preserved the skies and the earth by the Grace of Allah, from every devising of Shaitan. Destroy the financial institution of Shaitans and this world, shall Allah turn into a Paradise.
    (122). [2.169] Allah says distribute my food and water to the people and not to hoard it. But the shaitan’s say Allah commands us to sweat out first for earning money, before eating food or drinking water. The Shaitans say concerning Allah about Who, they do not know.
    (123). [2.170] Would you still follow the money based life and the financial institutions devised by the evil force, Shaitan? Will you not distribute the abundant that God produces forth for you?
    (124). [2.172] Every food and fruit, and water and the air is God’s provision and lawful for us if it is not exchanged for money. We shall obey Allah and show our thanks to Him if we are honest unto Him.
    (125). [2.173] Follow what Allah has pronounced as right for you and stay away from what Allah has declared as wrongful for you; and, do not take anyone else’s command other than what is declared in the Book of Allah. Ponder every word and sentence of His declaration in the Book and arrive by the help of Allah at a fair conclusion. As you come to know the truth, your very nature has already been changed to righteousness and tuned to it by the Grace and Mercy of Allah. Such people, by their inherent nobility, stand a model unto others. But there are those who knowingly hide what Allah has revealed in His Book. They pronounce the names, other than Allah, disobeying in arrogance, intending to make the fallen ones succumb to their evil designs that they donate their wealth and possessions to them. These are they, cursed for the doom of Fire.
	(126). [2.174] Allah has abandoned them both in this world and in the world next and eternally.
	(127). [2.176] Thus to counter the One Truth, The One God, – many false theologies, pointless ideologies, illogical concepts and infamous theories are being postulated day in and day out by the priesthood, the evil leaders, and the ‘god- men’, dividing one human race into schismatic million sections. Each sect and division believes and follows its desires the 'holy-rituals' as means to reach God.
	(128). [2.177] Turning toward east or west is no righteousness to face God; this is the reason why most of our submissions and prayers go unanswered by Allah however hard we cry for His Mercy. Not knowing what else to do, we drift away from Him and start committing shirk or set up partners to God. An all-prevailing example to this is believing more in the doctors to save our lives than believing in God when our illnesses reach their final stages. 
	(129). [2.178] The closest kin of the killed shall alone deliver the judgement about killing. If the slain is a free man, then a free man shall give the decision; if the killed is a slave, then a slave will pass the judgment; if the deceased is a woman, another woman shall have her say as the last word.
	(130). [2.183] Fasting is for the purification of our souls of all the evils of us associating partners to Allah, and to show our thanks to Allah for all His favours upon us. Whenever our hearts feel the freedom from anxiety and fear it means we are endowed and blessed inherently with the wisdom and guidance by Allah’s Grace. With the distinctive capacity, one shall tide over the crises, even in the most unfavourable situation that extinguishes the anger and anguish. And to show our gratitude for Allah’s grant of the Criterion in our hearts, we shall fast on such a day when we are calm and composed to Praise the Purity of Allah’s promise, and to purify our hearts therewith in our belief in the All-Knowing, the Most Benevolent.
	(131). [2.185] The thirty occasions of Ramadhan, well dispersed in a year of 365 days are appointed times and periods, unique for each one by Allah to enlighten them of a particular verse or the verses of Quran. And each time one reaches his appointed Hour on determined moments. During such moments Allah’s revelations come upon them: they are shown all the signs that inspire the ability to distinguish between the evil ways and the straight path with vision. And as a show of gratitude to Allah, it is obligatory upon him who visits such instances to fast on that day. Those are the counts of the days of Ramadhan; and, such 30 days are to be counted by each one so that they complete a month’s fasting in 365 days, comprising a year. 
	(132). [2.186] Bondmen are those who are inclined to believe in God alone and who will not associate anyone with God and seek not the help or protection from anyone other than God.
	(133). [2.187] Allah’s verses have been exact and complete in every sense from the inception of man on this earth, and there were no changes made by Allah to His verses to different prophets during different periods of their times.
	(134). [2.189] This verse has no link between the Ramadhan and the phases of the moon. Regarding Hajj, it is the Will or Command of Allah sent down upon our hearts as our Wishful life. The more intense our Wish is, and the more that our wish is free from doubt, and the more our steadfastness is with the term appointed by Allah, the nearer and more abundant is our reward from Allah. This holy journey in the path of Allah, with His Will and the same as our wish, on a course steadfast, the completion of our Hajj is already performed.
    	Enter your houses with honour and dignity, and with a clear and pure mind if you are righteous and fear God. But if you approach your homes with guilt and lies, it is like entering your houses through the back door, and it amounts to the destruction of the sanctity of your life itself; then the house may be possessed by the evil forces.
	(135). [2.190] Fighting in the path of Allah is resisting with the patience from succumbing to the anger induced by shaitans, with the help of Allah; and, fighting in the way of Allah is to seek patience from Him submissively. If Allah is with those who are patient, then asking patience from Him means, we say to Allah: O Allah be with us! Thereafter, it is Allah’s task to engage His enemies in combat. We do not see such reliance or submitting the Trust in Allah, in the Muslim world today, as means against those who fight them. It should be clear now if one shall ponder why Allah has not helped the so-called Muslims. 
	(136). [2.191] We do not find a Muslim leader of this standard in any of the ‘Muslim’ countries of the Middle East. They had not meted out the just recompense, which Allah had ordained for them. But there is one Muslim country, which did it: Bosnia!
		(137). [2.194] The sacredness of our entire lives rests in our efforts at purifying our hearts all our lives so that we shall hear only to the Message and the Guidance from the All-Mighty and make us steadfast in it.
   	(138). [2.195] All the good shall come from Allah alone (139).So if you intend good with patience, then God comes to your help, as every great event is in the process of designing and creation by Allah. Therefore, never attempt at it with your efforts using your lowly knowledge gathered from the worldly population, arrogantly against the Law of the Mighty Justice: All Good Comes Only Through Him (4.79). Spend in the way of Allah: with Patience and wishing that the righteousness shall prevail.    
	(140). [2.196] Stay committed to the Hajj – the Will of Allah, sent down upon your heart. (141). And follow it up with firm determination towards your ascent to the Will of Allah, seeking His Guidance – The Umra, all your life. (142). And there is no disease in any material part of the body, head or toe, but surely in one’s heart is (2.10). 
	(143). [2.197] The Hajj is God sending discrete Will upon each of us that rests in our soul as our individualised and His inspired Wish forever. With this our soul, sets out ascending towards it in its natural way, as guided by God; but we deviate and stay grounded by our inclination toward the worldly pleasures and go further, burying below the ground to unearth the lifeless glitters, such as gold, diamonds, etc. As a result, our life begins it’s suffering with suffocation, and we struggle hard to surface ourselves for the fresh breath of air from the heavens. The Original Will of God, by His Grace, delivers us from our submerged state for a fresh breath of air during our testing periods. We remember our Will – the Hajj, and turn to God with a willful wish. Our journey begins its ascent here, again. The above verse shows us the Straight Path for the successful journey towards fulfilling our Hajj. The Hajj is a defined period in life, which we shall complete, by the Will of the All-Mighty, if only we give a thought to the God endowed Wish resting in our souls inspiring us all through our lives.
	(144). [2.198] Since God is the Creator, to seek His help and guidance in that we endure, brings us reassurance as a glad tiding from Him. What God wants from us is that we shall not look forward to any help from the created things, other than Allah, the Originator and the Creator.
	(145). [2.199] We are likely to become stingy even as we are being bestowed with the bounties from Allah; so we need to seek His help and generousness forever as the prerequisite to please Allah.  
	(146). [2.202] Always fear if our earnings will ever have the blessings of Allah. So, spend from what He has bestowed upon us as His grace and seek His forgiveness for our stinginess that we become benevolent, lest the balance of His blessings on our earnings would soon wear out. Fear Allah before we become losers in this world in our avarice to earn every pleasure.
	(147). [2.203] For every wish of each one, there is a waiting period, determined and defined to test his patience during which Allah is watchful of his faith in Him. And if anyone loses patience and hurries through his ways, there is no great sin on him except that he might lose the reward of it, a little, and for awhile; and, again there is no sin on he who puts it off to a later date for the same reason. If only we remember Allah with gratitude for His favour and mercy, He would have surely guided us and strengthened our feet on the straight path. So, fear Him for the likelihood of lapses on our part.
	(148). [2.204] A great many politicians of the world shall very well fit into this kind.
	(149). [2.205] He would earn the people’s extreme wrath and the curse of Allah. Any warning, or advice to him shall drive him crazy.
	(150). [2.207] The obedient are those who are patient, God fearing, good-doers and guard them against Shaitan.
	(151). [2.208] The footsteps of shaitan are disgraceful conduct, use of disrespectful words and talks of vanity (2.197). Guarding against these evil qualities of shaitan certainly brings him peace from and kindness of Allah. 
    (152). [2.209] Either we reap all God given generous life strengthening belief in Allah’s promises, or we should slip on our knowledge. Know that Allah forgives our knowledge, for a spell within which period we shall know ‘the knowledge’ is nothing but a charm. And so gear up to hold firmly to the wisdom of Allah, and save us from following the teachings of men, which has been the cause of our ailments and sufferings over long, long testing periods during our lifetime.
    (153). [2.210] We shall not follow the world's majority knowledge because of which we see the world suffering from a clouded mind, the worst of all the mental agony and physical afflictions. Let us fear our reckoning on the Hour.
    (154). [2.211] From the time of Musa, his community, the people of Israel are the most favoured ones by Allah for His grace because of their show of extreme endurance in the Name of Allah, while under the cruel oppression of Firaun. Since then for millennia Allah has been favouring the people of Israel despite their growing aggression and arrogance against the peace loving nations, which act should have brought the wrath of the skies from above and of the earth from below. But as a show of His standing by His Promise: “Allah does not seize them then and there for their sins but appoints a time 35.45; 16.61; 18.58.” For thousands of years, the descendants of Israel have been witnessing this promise and the Sign of Allah to be true: the Most Patient, Gracious. The aggression of the people of Israel has been only worsening against all the nations. Allah is All Knowing, All Powerful. He is swift in reckoning and their appointed Hour may be nigh.  
    (155). [2.212] The 'posthumous lives' of the rejecters and their nations exhilarating with their exhumed earthly pleasures need not distract today’s enduring, God-graced, and God-loving people of tomorrow. And, tomorrow the world order will be in their hands with greater wisdom and power by the grace of Allah, over the deathward and the deadly knowledge of men.
	(156). [2.213] If the people do not fall into the split and splinter into sects and segments, and divisions and distortions they are One Human Nation even now. But if they fail to follow the Book of Truth, sent down through the prophets, and break into fragments with animosities and jealousy they are not to be humans anymore. And Allah has nothing to do with the divided sections (6.159); and further, Allah sternly warns the believers in Him and the Book not to have any connections in any manner with them.
    (157). [2.213] Without the firsthand knowledge of the Book of Truth, i.e., without the application of the mind to the Signs, and without the appreciation of the clarity of the verses of Quran, we cannot settle even the tiffs, trifles, differences or disturbances, commonly occurring within the members of the family. The ever-quarrelsome households become of castaways thus, abandoned by God. They, after that, shall turn towards worshipping their invented associations to God. There is no protector for them nor will they find a helper.
    (158). [2.213] Become of One human nation, is the Command of Allah without falling into sections, if one wants the protection and help from Allah, directly taking only the guidance from the Book, given to you in Truth by the prophets. If anyone, by associations, falls into the hands of the people without the Book, then they are the fallen people, and the believers in Allah and the Book will have no relationship with such of them even if they are your parents, children, kith and kin, or spouses  9.24. But mostly we follow as against the ordainment of the verse (9.24), (i.e.) the Book given to us in Truth. 
   		Our caprices, desires and avarice led us as the followers of the priesthood for they do not go by the Book of Truth, but by the books written by their hands, and who then say, ‘they were from Allah and the messenger’ 2.79. And so, the mischievous priests among themselves are fragmented one people into sections and divisions against Allah’s dictum that says, “Do not cause divisions in the straight path of Islam.” But to Allah’s displeasure, we have taken to the priesthood that led us astray and wander as pariahs.
    (159). [2.214] Each of us would pass the test from Allah whereupon all the help and protection we were seeking besides the only God would decisively vanish. Until such time we cleanse our hearts of the evils of all associations with the false gods, every test from God will cease our hearts with fear and anxiety to make us appreciate the Truth of One God, Allah. Now, we will see that Allah's help is already there. But those who cry, “Where is Allah’s help?” is because their hearts have not yet attained calmness from the shaking to see that things are already there for whatever they are crying. Allah’s help will be seen as ever close, when their hearts are purified of all the evil associations to the Only God, Allah. The worst form of our setting up partnerships to God, such as the money, and the financial position on par with, or above God. Till we stay clear of this attitude, Allah is not satisfied with us. Therefore spend of what Allah has given you; and, do not store, save and starve with disgracefully low living standards before Allah. To save you from the tests of hardships and penury, spend in righteousness, believing in Allah, the Most The Trustworthy. 
	(160). [2.215] This is the greatest of all wars against shaitan! Shaitans will fight tooth and nail against us spending the money for the righteous cause. They are from among the jinn (the unseen evil forces) and from among the men (the visible evil forces). These are the two major evil forces we house in our hearts. When we say the visible evil forces from among the men each of us make a good part of it, if we know ourselves. Shaitan will have no part to play in us if only we are devout in our obedience to Allah due to fear for Him. To beat the shaitan out of our hearts is the greatest war of all times (38.83), The Holy War orThe Jihad!	
    (161). [2.216] The Just War is between the good forces in our Souls and the evil forces of Shaitan; both these forces being unseen, there is no physical fight involved in the Just War, except keeping up faith and patience for Allah's sake. And we shall not advance before Allah by losing patience – This is the Just War. Those in whose heart is the disease of pride, for them observing patience is hateful, and they will be all out for the physical conflict by which they shall never find a peaceful life in the hereafter whether they win or lose. Those who are patient, Allah is with them; and those who are impatient Shaitan is with them. The impatient ones exhibit arrogance and pride which Allah hates, and their final reward shall be an evil abode. And those who fear God, they preserve patience and show humility; and, for them, the reward is the garden of eternal bliss. Patience is what you shall wish for if you are a slave unto Allah; but, a show of arrogance will be the way of those who are slaves to Shaitans.
    (162). [2.223] Before seeking your women for solace, fear God and send forth your truthfulness for Allah loves those who are respectable for their fairness in mind, speech and act. Do not ill-treat your women in any untoward manner; fear your meeting with Allah, and it is a glad news to the believers.
	(163). [2.224] God is All-Knowing – you can plead before Him for all your good, but you cannot make promises by His Name, taking Him for granted. That is pride and arrogance.
	(164). [2.225] We save us from the wrath of Allah by not being treacherous and mischievous in our hearts while making others believe us.
	(165). [2.226] If they do not get back by four months their marriage stands dissolved. It is considered divorce.
    (166). [2.227] Deciding upon divorce is much better before Allah than forswearing the wives and keeping them under you in four months’ custody.
    (167). [2.228] Men are created by nature, a degree above women in the strength of faith, obedience and tolerance. And they are not expected to lose their prudence as to pronounce divorce on their women if they are faithful and obedient to Allah; and so, they are to return to their real sense before the waiting period of three months on women are over. Allah loves those who cause reconciliation over division.
	(168). [2.232] The admonition here is that one shall not stand in the way of women when they love and choose a life partner themselves.
	(169). [2.234] Allah has allowed liking and choosing in one’s mind as a life partner before marriage and that which ends in love marriage.
	(170). [2.235] According to this verse, the ordainment of Allah is, it is not a sin to love and then to propose in a fair manner before the marriage tie.
    (171). [2.236] In truth, it is akin to giving divorce when you fix up an occasion to see a prospective girl for the marriage tie and then rejecting her after the ceremony is over. It is mandatory that men should endow the women with a dowry, equitable.      
    (172). [2.237] It is a divorce before Allah, even if you had not touched the woman but when you say, ‘no’ after fixing her dower. Half the portion of the dowry - usually a sizable chunk of one's property or possession - will be set as the dower to the prospective woman at the espousal. Giveaway spending in Allah’s cause and guard against the evil of association of your wealth and property to the generosity of Allah.
    (173). [2.238] Keeping our mind in Allah’s remembrance forever is Prayerfulness to guard our mind against Shaitan’s intrusions; and, the accomplices of Shaitans in men always surround us. (174). And, it is they who create worry and fear in the uncertain mind, now and then, in the middle of our peaceful course, all our lives. Unless we are prayerful, (i.e.) in constant remembrance of Allah, The Most-True, to whom we shall submit and say, “O God, save us from the worry and fear of this world”, we would be lost anywhere, anytime through the middle of our lives’ all the peaceful processes. (175). And we are not to be relieved of our stressful hearts but for our adherence and steadfastness in His Faith alone, all our moments; and, that our submissions to Him, the Most Honourable, shall surely be answered and shall set us free from the whisperings of Shaitans who cause the worry and fear. 
	(176). [2.239] Emigrate or exile on foot or in vehicles to a place of safety if you find yourself weak before a community of shaitans’ arrogance and power (4.97). Have patience; no need to fight them;  Allah is with you – stay humble and move away leaving your home, and seek from Allah His security and provision (14. 35, 37); He would spread the earth for you with all liveliness in it (4.100). Remember all these verses and signs of Allah and praise His glory for that which He has taught you. He is sufficient for you as a Helper and a Protector. But you were careless about this before.
	And so adhere not to the practice of what the majority of your community follows (6.116); follow what Allah reveals to you and obey only Allah, if your wish is that you shall live in His provisions and security all your lives, safe from the clutches of Shaitans. 
	(177). [2.240] That is the maintenance for the widows. If only we follow this in our houses concerning the widows, the need for the exile (2.239) from your living places shall not come to pass. Allah is informing us that which we know not. Remember Him thus: O the Guide; there is no Guide but You. And Allah teaches us further how we should behave concerning our household,
    (178). [2.241] The ‘whole Muslim world’ is hell-bent against this dictum of Allah. The women’s right to a fair provision and maintenance and that they shall stay in their houses, and that they are not to be expelled out of their houses are not cared for at all. (65:1) And that the divorced women shall not leave the houses where they had lived with their husbands. If they are divorced, the husbands should exit the house, and not the wives. But in the USA, this is the Law of the Nation. There exists a perfect Islamic Law! Therefore Allah has placed those people a rank above the people of the rest of the world; they shall travel anywhere and live in honour where they wish to live. And for the same reason, the ‘Muslim community’ as a whole is not finding a place of safety and security all around the globe. There is no honourable existence for them even while in exile. Unless the Muslims repent and reform fearing their God, their living on the earth will be hell. 
    (179). [2.243] Allah surely knows the limit of the believers’ endurance. So He allowed them to their resolve that dying in Allah’s cause is greater than suffering humiliation and death at the hands of the transgressors when they exiled; and, they abide by their decision, which is a great sacrifice indeed. And Allah raised them to a degree above the oppressors, and the angels’ protection surrounded them until the destruction of the enemy forces was total, and as a result of which the land would bloom in nature’s splendour. They returned to their homeland - full of life, liveliness and glory. That is the gift of Allah, but most people fell to ingratitude, denying His Favour and Kindness to them. While Allah is still the possessor of Mercy, Forgiveness and dignity for us, says to us, “Will you not give a thought, striving in the Remembrance?
    (180). [2.245] Submitting to Allah’s command, if one helps a loan to someone, it is like offering the trust in the hands of Allah Himself; and, then he has no account of it with the person to whom he has given the money. For he would find the returns from his debtor Allah if only he knows.
    (181). [2.246] Before we choose our leaders, we have to scrutinise them with careful attention, for mostly they would turn away without respecting their promises when the time comes to fighting the evil forces. Today, the world is in turmoil because of such choices of the dishonest leaders, by the wrongful people. They are without guidance from Allah, to fight a single insolently aggressive nation which is all-out and against them all. One shall not say that they are superpowers and we are weak nations, for Allah says: (2.249) “… How many a small country has won over the strong soldiers and armouries of the mighty lands by the leave of Allah. And Allah is only with those who are patient…” The only winnable weapon in a war situation is ‘the patience’ to fight in the path of Allah. There is not a single leader on the earth with the quality of such patience, to lead their nations so that Allah is with them as their Leader to annihilate the aggressors. Allah’s Way to fight all evils always rests in ‘Preserving us in Patience’.
    (182). [2.247] To lead a life of tranquillity, physical comfort and safety from Allah alone, believing in the abundance of the earthly wealth, knowledge, and in the strength of its people will not do. Rather it is the gift of patience, mental acuity in preserving, and in keeping lasting patience from Allah, which are the bringer of Grand victories over all evil from every direction – both from men and from jinns. And Allah grants such kingship to whom He will.
    (183). [2.250] Dawud was one of the commanders in the army of Talut when they fought Jalut and his forces. Talut died in the combat, and Dawud took charge of his troops, and defeated the enemy forces and killed Jalut.
	(184). [2.251] Allah chooses Dawud as a prophet and a messenger.
    (185). [2.253] Each one of us has the Ruh of Allah, as our Soul, breathed into us at the first breath of our life when we were born. Allah governs His Ruh or The Soul through two Angel Messengers: Ruh-ul-Quddus(the Angel Jibreel) and Ruh-ul-Amin (the Angel Mikhail), the former delivers the Pure Messages from Allah to our Souls, and the latter Reveals the Signs of Allah’s Messages so that they go forth clearly in the path of Allah. Thus Allah’s Wahi, the Messages as glad tidings and warnings reach each man through the Ruh of Allah, our Soul. Jibreel receives the Wahi, and Mikhail reveals its Portents to those who ponder. That becomes the conscience of a man speaking to him all through his life as a comprehensive guidance and admonition to make him fall in line on the Straight Course of Allah.    
    (186). [2.255] The expansiveness of Allah’s Throne encompasses all the heavens above, and the world below and everything in between. Neither tiredness, nor drowsiness, nor deep sleep would ever touch Him on account of His sustaining or enriching or making them scanty as a recompense and reward for the man, until the Last Day. The heavens enrich and expand for those who believe and behave; and, the heavens close down and the world straitens for those who disbelieve and misbehave. Allah knows what each of us has sent forth for our good and our doom; and, the same that each of us has left behind for our gain or ruin. Taking account of these and preparing the heavens and the world for our reward and recompense is not at all trying for Him. And on the Day of our reckoning we all have to return to Him for our endless and eternal journey either in the hell or the heaven; and, none shall intercede for another on that Day. That is the wisdom of Allah, and He reveals it to whom He will.
    (187). [2.256] The Compulsion upon the righteousness means Shaitan has entered into that activity, and the fruits of it shall ruin. We find this Satanic intimidation playing an active and dangerous role, in all the religious groups, through their leaders, who fiercely coerce their people and their households to follow strictly, the ritualistic exercises. Those who believe in this as an ordainment from Allah, let them refrain from intimidating anyone to do rituals in the name of religion, and may they maintain patience and humility, thereby wishing peace. Allah is good enough to save them from all the disastrous sanctions. That is religiously being prayerful. God loves such people.
	(188). [2.257] Whenever we are in the dark gloom of our sadness, we have experienced that we are mentally pushed further deep into the darknesses. In our prayers, let our submission be as: ”O Allah, bring us to Your Light from our darkness and save us from Shaitans among the men and jinns.”
	(189). [2.258] As Muslims unto God alone, none shall look up to the kings, presidents, prime ministers, rulers or administrators for our life and protection. Say to your Soul, “Our God, make us Muslims unto You alone; and, save us from the wrongdoers.”
	(190).[2.259] It is a general question of the people about our life after death on the day of our resurrection. They say, “What! Are we going to be a new creation after our bones have become fragmented into bits and dust?” One such person, who was seriously harbouring the question in mind for a long time, whose belief firmly rested in being the firsthand witness to this Sign. Allah knows what we hide in our hearts, and He knows who is truthful towards his quest so that Allah picks him up to make him a witness to His Sign. In the above verse is the citation of such a Sign shown to one of His chosen bondsman, who himself was reduced to bones and dust from which he was raised, and through the assemblage of his donkey, Allah showed him how he was brought back to life after he was bones and dust. And then with this Sign and Wisdom, he was sent to the people as a ‘messenger’ who could convince them and teach them the wisdom of this Sign (17.49, 98; 23.35).
	That is not the only situation that Allah had shown His Signs to His bondmen; and, here is another instance, this time to Prophet Ibrahim.      
	(191). [2.260] That is another example that the Mighty and Wise never say ‘No’ if His bondmen seek His Signs from Him to strengthen their hearts in faith and to be faithful unto Him. Therefore, each of our prayers is: “My God, make me a Sign unto myself for every verse I recite of The Book, so as to comfort my heart and confirm my Faith in You.”
	(192). [2.261] In every spending of our penny in the path of Allah, He purifies our souls more and more in the righteousness for endless gain. He Expands His provision and proposition for us, and He Encompasses them all from any evil force touching them.
    (193). [2.262] Fear is the emotion linked to one’s future, and grief is the emotion tied to the losses in one’s past. Why should a believer in God suffer from both these emotions? It is because we have not sought God’s forgiveness for our evil acts that it shall not follow us; nor have we stopped sending forth our evil thoughts and activities that our emotions shall not haunt us anymore. But, Allah has already forgiven our past and set right our future as a goodly act in our present day living, guarding us against the worst of all our misdeeds, only to make us repent that we do not disgrace or insult anyone on account of his receiving His Grace. Let us Pray to God: O Allah, save the humanity from grief and fear, all its life.
	(194). [2.263] Let our minds be charitable; Allah is needless of your wealth and properties, nor of that which you had earned through your hands, for Allah is Absolute and He is Oft-Returning.
    (195). [2.264] Charity begins at home; here, each household is the beneficiary of another, especially the husband and the wife; one, the receiver from the other. Between any two members, whoever possesses a greater wealth, shows his or her pride above the other, injuring, insulting and disgracing, and denying the beautiful relationship God has provided. They have no respect for God, nor do they show humility before God. Their life would be non-productive for they are not living on the liveliness of the earth but a barren bald rock.
    (196). [2.265] Allah’s satisfaction with us is possible only when we shed our pride and become humble and obedient before Him. His recompense for this is His strengthening of our Faith in Him; and then, when we spend our wealth and possessions in His Honour – our life begins in a garden upon the high ground with the pleasantness of breeze, rain, showers and beauty of nature and its wealth in lush, all around. Prayer: O Allah! Begin our lives in the garden on high ground.
    (197). [2.266] Prayer: O Allah pardon me of all my sins, and may You guide my offspring in Thy Way, and save us all both in this world and on the Day of Reckoning. You are the Most Forgiving, Forbearing. 
	(198). [2.267] Prayer: O Allah, expand my heart to seek only well for others; and, make me needless in this world except You, Your generosity, O the Most Praiseworthy. 
	(199). [2.268] Prayer: O Allah, The Expansive and All-Knowing! Save us from indecency and dishonour, and prosper us in our Wisdom and make our lives generous. 
	(200). [2.269] Prayer: O Allah!  Grant us purity in our thought that always ascends unto You; and, bestow us abundance and absoluteness from You.
	(201). [2.270] Prayer: O Allah! Make our every spending all through our lives worthy of merit and Your acceptance.  And leave us not among the wrong-doers.
    (202). [2.271] Allah says kind words and forgiveness is far better than giving alms and then following it with insult and disgrace to the recipients on a later occasion. Let our prayers be thus: O Allah! We put our Trust in You, the All-Knowing, to guide us that we may reap the best out of our charity. Cleanse us of our vile and sinful nature, and expand our hearts in equity for the humanity.
    (203). [2.272] The recompense we receive from the MostHigh as fruits of our spending, and good deeds are far greater than all that we have earned, and His Grace lasts with us for eternity. We will never know how great and benevolent the gift of Allah that which He shall create for us, for our pleasing deeds will be. Thus is the reward for those who believe and do the best of the things, believing in the Generousness of the Unseen Almighty.   
	(204). [2.275] The USURY or business which runs on the interest charged from the debtor is harmful to the society. Usury or the financial business or the banking is vile in the sight of Allah while he makes trade lawful and admissible, and thus are the opposites to one another. 
    The usury is this: For example, when we have surplus money with us, far exceeding our required limits, it is for helping the needy with it by lending them a helping hand. If only we fear our conscience, we shall not charge interest and usurp away their livelihood. But for the mercy and kindness from Allah upon us, it is not possible for us to lend anyone money, without this sin. Those who live on usury have deprived themselves of the Godly qualities such as Kindness, Forgiveness and Mercy, and thus their character will be of arrogance and insult (2.262, 263). It is a clear sign for those who understand their nature is not that of Allah but that of Shaitan. Therefore Allah, without His Kindness, Forgiveness and Mercy abandons those who live on usury. Hell suffices them in both the worlds.
	And the trade is this: In the trade business, we exchange the good for the money with a profit placed on it. Once the goods change hands you have no hold or claim of ownership to the things you have sold. Thus a transaction is clear and straight. But in usury, you claim ownership to the money you had given, and then charge interest on the money with which the borrower earns living through his hard days work, as well. Usury is trickery, treachery and wanton fraud deliberately committed on the humanity. Those who live on usury will rise every day as the one who was possessed by Shaitan.  
    (205). [2.277] Anyone who is in fear and grief for whatever reason, trivial or grave at any point of time are neither believers, nor do they do any good works, nor their prayers are accepted, then.  
    (206). [2.278] Usury is such a dreadful crime because it openly grabs away the wealth and the properties of the borrowers by deceit. There is no right trade involved in it. And in usury, there is no exchange of investment or capital, for the money usurped. While the investor robs the money, the ‘beneficiary’ is deprived of it and left rundown. To involve in usury is as waging a direct war against Allah. Hell is their abode both in this world and in the hereafter.
	(207). [2.279] Very similar to usury is the long-time renting-business such as house renting - the finance trade.
    (208). [3.1] These are the initials of Allah: A is the first letter of His Name Aalim, meaning the All-Knowing. L is the initial of His Name Latif, meaning the Gentle, and M is the initial of His Name Mumin, meaning the Giver of Faith. Therefore the meaning of the Three Initials Alif, Laam, Meem - A L M combined is: The All-Knowing is the Most Gentle in imparting the Faith.
	(209). [3.6] As Allah has fashioned the creation of humankind as individually discreet in the wombs, He shall create again, and again every moment of your life, in perfection, unique to your individuality. Do not follow the people and their ways in the world, but seek from Allah for a characteristically distinct life. 
	(210). [3.7] Every verse of the Book has two things in it: one is the wisdom, which you seek only from Allah, the Bestower of the Book in TRUTH. And the second is the guidance that Allah gives towards the understanding, appreciation and the application of its sense, in every word and sentence of the Book. That is the way of the believers who believe that Allah alone shall assist in the learning of the verses of, and to get the guidance, from the Book. And He alone shall lead us through His verses to our endless peaceful life. Such enlightened ones are only a minimal number of people, in the entire world.
	There are the other groups in greater numbers who follow the self-projecting religious leaders who only carry the ‘Books’ written by their hands without any knowledge, and then falsely claim them to be from God. Therefore they are the people left astray by God, as they plunge into their contumacy.
    (211). [3.8] If our submission is that we seek His mercy alone to save us from a pitiable life, verily, Allah shall assist and lead us on the right course. 
	(212). [3.11] The Signs of Allah are but the Truth, and it is a grave sin to deny it. He who disobeys is to face the afflictions as the penalty. The diseases and the miseries are the direct results of the sin of belying the Truth, the Signs of Allah. None shall avail anyone in aught against Allah.
    (213). [3.14] Whatever attracts and gives pleasure to the physical senses of humans are a trial to them in that they shall see, had they used their insight, that would have perceived that they all would last with them only for a very short while; and, they shall know their life itself is on the losing-edge. O humans, you see the women as a gratification to men and seek males as a frivolous enjoyment to the women. Your sons are delighting to the eyes; heaped up gold and silver are regarded as your succours, and the possession of the branded vehicles are your status, and, the wealth of your cattle and acquiring all provisions of the lands are your Pride. Thus it is made beautiful to those who do not reflect and understand. They are people without knowledge. All their possessions of the pleasures of the world will end soon, with adversities lasting on them. 
    (214). [3.16] If we say, “We have believed”, then, let us refrain from relying on our knowledge in removing our adversities against which we seek Allah’s help. Allah says, “You do not believe Me except while keeping the shirk, i.e., while still believing in the aid and protection of all men and their practices (12.106).” 
	(215). [3.20] The only way to follow the Prophets and the Messengers is to turn to Allah, serving Him alone.                
    (216). [3.21] Killing the Prophets: The Prophet lineage has ended with Muhammad, and the Prophethood completes with the sending down of Quran. And if the verses of Quran is the guidance for all time to come and for all the people to follow – how can anyone kill the Prophets today and tomorrow and until the end of the world? Refer to (2.91)  
        	The Prophets and the Messengers are the raised ones and the foremost in the eyes of Allah and therefore are not to be considered, or referred to as ‘dead’. They are being fed and honoured by Allah, and are living today and will ever be living with us.  So, when Allah says, ‘why are you killing the Prophets,’ it means we denounce their mission in this world, by denying the Signs they brought from Allah (2.61, 161, 91, 154; 3:181). All the prophets have come to their brethren with the following message: “I am a messenger and a Warner from Allah, the God of the worlds; there is no God for you but Him; so, fear Allah and behave.” Since the Prophets are not to be called as dead, their glad tidings and warnings hold good to every person of the world for all-time; all the Prophets are living with us today (4.69). We know that every good thing that happens in our life has come only from Allah (4.79). Therefore, we shall not worship or associate the worldly things, the men and the matters with Allah. If so, then it amounts to killing all the Prophets alive always in our life by belying them all. For instance, the Prophet Ayyub: He believed and surrendered before Allah for his long-drawn ailments, seeking His Forgiveness and Mercy; and so, Allah cured him of all his ailments, gave him his family and the likes of them. The Prophet Ayyub did live as a witness before the people, how to seek the Mercy of Allah; and that, they shall not believe and worship the doctors as healers of diseases (21.83, 84;  38.41). But our claim to be believers in God, and then rushing to doctors to save our lives, we cry lies to the Prophet Ayyub and kill His mission in this world. Prophet Ibrahim said, “When I am suffering from diseases it is Allah who cures me (26.80).” We can not become Muslims and believers in the Prophet Ibrahim when we decry the Prophet Ibrahim and kill him alive by denying his mission when we believe the doctors and fall into their hands to save our lives.                                      
    (217). [3.23] Those who possess the Wisdom of the Book will speak only from the Book. And, there are people to whom a limited knowledge of the Book is given, who recite to the people, the ‘books’ they had written by their hands (2.79), and then they should say: It is from Allah! It is they who are averse to the “Book of Justice”, the Quran from Allah.
    (218). [3.24] Those who take to the ‘books’ other than the “Book of Allah”, do say, and believe that the judgement of Allah to those who are bound for the hellfire eternally, is invalid. They reject the verses of Allah (2.80) and (3.24). They are the followers of the ‘books’ other than “The Book”, and they are those who equate the men written books to the Holy Quran. For them the Day of Truth, the Eternal torment is to arrive!
    (219). [3.33] The Foremost among the people of all the worlds is – the people whose souls rose when they ‘died’ in the cause of Allah who will be ever living as witnesses, until the end of the world. They are those who advanced before as the descendants, and they who are striving in Allah's Way, as the progenies, and they who shall also rise as the descendants of Adam, Nuh, Ibrahim, Imran and so on.
    (220). [3.34] Such descendants are one Nation, one People! They will not divide among themselves and become sectarians against the cause of Allah; and, Allah hates such men and women who follow such defiant groups (6.159). 
	(221). [3.35] Prophet Imran was no more when this dedication by his wife was made to Allah.
	(222). [3.36] Wife of the Prophet Imran was all alone with Maryam, and her only solace is to be with Allah.
	(223). [3.37] These words of Maryam as a grace from Allah inspire His faith in Zachariah’s Soul, who did not have a child for long, but he was still very much in the reproductive age. He turns to his God then and there. 
    (224). [3.38] Ever since Zachariah invoked Allah without a moment’s hesitation when inspired by Maryam’s answer, Allah has granted him a son with wholesome purity. Long, long years and decades go by; and, Maryam too should have grown well into her middle age by then; all along Allah purifies Zachariah and his wife and cures them of their sterility. The right moment is on, and ripe now, decades after his prayer, to deliver the glad tiding to Zachariah. But about that time Zachariah had long forgotten the very invocation and supplication he made to Allah for a pure progeny, decades ago.
	(225). [3.39] Zachariah was off his guard when taken by surprise at the news by the angels; and, when he calmed down and regained normalcy, he turned to his God. He would not know then that his wife had been cured of her sterility.
    (226). [3.40] Zachariah wished it were there, but he was desperate to believe it; so he turned to his God.
   	(227). [3.41] And the Sign for Zachariah from Allah is that he would be able to communicate with his people for three days with ease without the aid of his mouth or his tongue; that is His Sign to show Zachariah, Allah does what He wills. Allah will make his people understand his communications to them through his signs as exactly as what he has as his feelings, that which he will not be able to communicate with all his verbal excellence. And that was sufficient proof for Zachariah.                        
	(228). [3.44] This indicates that the mother of Maryam, wife of Imran is also no more at this point.         
	(229). [3.58] The Book is total Wisdom, which every human soul or the RUH of Allah possesses in absoluteness. It acts as the guide for each human to lead a fruitful life independent of one another, by Allah; the more we reminisce of our beautiful and lovely past that the Wisdom granted us, the more we shall enter into our Soul, the infinite Wisdom, our RUH.
	(230). [3.59] There is no change in His creation whatsoever (30.30): when He intends a thing, He says to it, “Be!” And it is. 
   	(231). [3.61] This invocation for the curse of Allah upon someone is only against those who dispute and cast lies on the verses of Quran concerning Maryam, Isa and Allah. That is because, to say Allah has a son should cause catastrophe to the astronomical and geological phenomenon (19.88, 90). In essence, it is doom to the entire universe; today, all the afflictions of the whole world edging toward an explosion of nuclear war is because of the Christian belief that preaches: “God has a Son!”  To avoid the apocalypse, it is mandatory that the Christians and the rest of the world population should come together to appear on the world stage to take the curse upon those who lie against God. 
	Until such time this curse is invoked, upon the people who lie on God, on the worldwide open stage, and thus close the matter, seeking pardon to those who have not been involved in such crime, none can save anyone from the total disaster.
    (232). [3.62] Allah’s Narration or Revelation alone is the Truth; there is no Narrator but Allah; we shall neither believe the narrators other than Allah, nor shall we associate with the Only Narrator, Allah. What happens to the narrators of Hadiths on this ground is anybody’s take.
    (233). [3.64] (Refer to 3.98) The dangerous ones to follow are those who claim to be the people who have known the Book and proclaimed themselves as the protectors of the Quran and as the Imams of the Masjids. This verse pinpoints these so called protectors and imams who divided One Muslim Nation into fragments such as Sunni, Shia, Ahmadiyya, Rashadi, Salafi, Wahabi etc., and questions if their intention is to be Muslims at all. Based on 6:159, one can find anyone’s disobedience to Allah, when he or she identifies himself or herself with any of these divided sections; if one does so, neither Allah nor His Messengers nor the believers have aught to do with those sections, for they are not Muslims. And this is the reason why the Muslims belonging to various divisions, do not have Allah answering them, nor protecting them, nor helping them, even as the catastrophe befalls ‘the so called Muslims’ from the skies above and every corner of the world.
    	Stand firm upon the witness that Allah Reveals: “There is no God we shall believe, obey and follow other than Allah.” And we shall never follow those who claim to be having the wisdom of the Quran and declare them to be the All Knowing. We shall disown such claimants to the Book. Only now will we be able to hear the Revelation of Allah as He guides us by His RUH, He has breathed into each of us. 
	Here in the following verse Allah further Reveals about those who demand ownership to the Book.                  
	(234). [3.65] (Refer to 3.98). It is a direct question by Allah, to the claimants to the ownership of the Book; they are the people who understand not of the Book. For they pretend to know all about the Book of Allah, because they followed ‘books’ written by the hands of men (2.79), as historical explanations against the Self Revealing, the Only Book of Allah. The dispute here is about whether Ibrahim was a Jew or a Christian. 
    (235). [3.67] A Muslim is one who shall not identify him with the men invented religions, religious sects and divisions, but will reveal himself with the earnest followers of the Truth for the sake of Peace from Allah. Be he a believer (Muslim), or a Jew, or a Christian, or Sabians (belonging to any division, sect of any religion) – a genuine follower of Ibrahim will be steadfast in righteousness for the Truth and Peace; but will hate the man-invented polytheism. The polytheism invented against the path of truth is the sole reason why the humanity has shredded into dreaded divisions and sections, plaguing the entire world, as human made Islam has done. Prophet Ibrahim would never associate him with such polytheistic Islam. So who are those who are closer to Ibrahim?                          
	(236). [3.68] Prophet Ibrahim’s way is the path of all the Prophets, and this is the True Path of Allah; never follow the polytheistic imams-created Islam that constituted many sections and divisions, but it is them who claim to be the guardians of the Book; it is they who divided ‘One Muslim’ into schisms. Allah has nothing to do with such self-advocating leaders who favour divisions in Islam (6.159); and, so also is the order, with this Prophet and those who believed him and Ibrahim.  
    (237). [3.69] (Refer to 3.98). The people of the Book are those to whom Allah had granted a small life, or a lease of it, by what they possess as their souls from the wisdom of the Book, as only a test unto them to see how they behave. If they fear Allah and be humble before Him, He would grant from His wisdom more and more and may choose among them the leaders of the people. But sad enough for each of them, each claimed authority over the Quran by the grant of a small part of the wisdom of the Book. And with pride, they claim superiority over the people, and make them humble and fall before them. Various self-projecting religious leaders with vested interests had swarmed like bees all over the world, each one advocating a strange ritualistic cult.  
    (238). [3.70] (Refer to 3.98). The people of the Book are those to whom Allah has given some knowledge of the Signs of the Book as only a test unto them. If they behave well with it, creating oneness in the minds of the people, it is for their good; and, if they act wrongfully with it causing variances in the minds of the people, then it is for their misery. But with the wisdom, most incline towards this worldly wealth and comforts denying the Signs of Allah, causing dissensions and enmity; the little wisdom Allah has given them has been twisted and miscommunicated with a charm, enchanting the masses. Each ‘owner of the Book’ thus creates deviations in the minds of the believing people and causes divisions in them, following certain unusual rituals to pray God. Based on the rituals of prayers, each section would identify them as the followers of a particular religious leader.    
	(239). [3.71] (Refer to 3.98). Allah repeatedly warns the believing people and the dividers who speak of the Book causing deviation and discord amongst the believers from their oneness.  
    (240). [3.72] (Refer to 3.98). The plot of a party of  ‘The people of the Book’ to turn away those believers who come to their people, with the true revelations of the verses of the Book against what they had preached thus far as conjectures is: ‘feign belief’ to their preaching! When they appear before you in the mornings and throw them behind your backs in the evening when they retire; tired of this, will discourage them and turn them away from you.” And Allah says to the believers, “Do not take into confidence those who are not of you.”
	(241). [3.74] Prayer: “O Merciful, have me in your nearness all my life.”
	(242). [3.75] Prayer: “O Benevolent, make us not needy before the liars against You.”  Refer to (3.98)
	(243). [3.77] Prayer: “O the Guide, speak to me and guide me all the time. O the Seer, May Your watches be upon me, and correct me then and there; O the Most Pure, remove the evil in me and keep the evil jinns from whispering into my heart; O the Most Forgiving save me from the hellfire on the Lasting Day.”  
	(244). [3.79] Our abiding by Allah, and obeying the prophets, and following the messengers read, rests on rehearsing the Book first hand, and then reciting the Truth to others while himself being an inspiring model to the Signs of the Book. We cannot quote the Book to others without rehearsing it ourselves for Allah hates preaching that which one does not practice (61.2, 3).  
    (245). [3.81] Before Allah sent every Prophet to his people, He takes oath from each of them that they should go to the individuals with the Wisdom and the Book, and that they deliver them with it, the good news from Allah. The news from all the Prophets to their respective people, including the Prophet Muhammad is: After every prophet, a messenger will come with the same Truth and wisdom that all the Prophets delivered to their brethren and that they had come to them bearing clear Signs from Allah.        
	(246). [3.82] The evil doers are those who reject the Messengers sent by Allah to confirm and testify the wisdom, and the Book given to them through the Prophets, who have come to them before, from the last to the first.                         	
	(247). [3.83] Allah’s straight path is, believing in Him, and believing in the Prophets, and obeying and following the Messengers who come after each Prophet to guide them through the Wisdom, and the Book they are in possession of from their previous Prophets, from the last to the first. If we follow this straight path willingly, then by Allah, the heavens and earth surrender to us willingly or unwillingly.
	(248). [3.84] It is the Furqan endowed upon the Ruh of each of us, by which we ascertain that the verses of Quran are from Allah (4.82). The Furqan is the Criterion: the distinct and distinguishing ability of a man, by using which alone one shall conduct himself in righteousness through the Quran.
	(249). [3.91] If we believe we will spend all our wealth fearing our lives, on a fateful day or a period, when a torment from Allah shall touch us - then, keep spending what is possible for you of the good and the food that you had stored for your future. And, then believe in Allah, as the Nourisher, the Sustainer.
    (250). [3.95] Ibrahim became a believer and then, a Muslim, by what Allah Himself did teach him the straight path by His wisdom. This is the straight path of Allah. When Ibrahim turned away from idol worshipping, the brilliance of the stars caught his attention that made him think they could be gods, but when his better sense prevailed over it, by Allah, he withdrew from the stars. And then Ibrahim turned towards the moon and thought it could be the god; but Allah made it vanish as his insight, by Allah, opened up his vision; then finally, he saw the sun as the biggest of all heavenly things, which he thought to be the god. All the while Allah helped Ibrahim by His Wisdom and made him denounce that all the created things can never be the god, but the creator is. Finally, the Light of Allah became the fountainhead for Ibrahim, by the grace of Almighty Allah. This is Allah’s way; the prophet Ibrahim’s Way, for the people of all the worlds.
	Thus, each one shall use his criterion, bidding God’s help all the time, to know who He is. None but He shall teach His bondmen concerning Him. This is the path of Ibrahim. He did not associate ‘religious leaders’, the teachers of religious schools of thoughts or ‘the god-men’ to teach him who God is. If we want to be Muslims only to Allah, then, we shall believe in Allah that only He would teach us about Him and none else; this is non-association to Allah, the True path of Ibrahim.
	(251). [3.96] Each one’s Soul is the prime-most living place for every human.
	(252). [3.98,99] O people of the Book – O those who know very little of the Wisdom of the Book – O those who have memorised the Book without having any wisdom of it – O those who claim ownership to the Book, if you are truthful why do you reject the Signs of Allah and of His Book?
	(253). [3.103] Refer to (6.159)
	(254). [3.105] Refer to (6.159) 
    (255). [3.107] In this worldly living, these are the signs by which a righteous soul shall identify an evil mind by the permission of Allah.
	(256). [3.109] In the following verse Allah defines, as to how beautiful personalities of the people of the Book shall behave and lists out their features. 
	(257). [3.110] Refer to (3.69, 70, 71, 72 and 98) for the ‘People of the Book’.
	(258). [3.112] 2.61, 91; 3.21, 112, 181; 4.155 – All these verses speak as if there were instances that the Prophets were killed, and such atrocities will be carried out all through the history of mankind till the D Day, also with the Messengers. Refer to (2.91)  
     	The Prophets and the Messengers are not to be considered dead for they are being fed and honoured by Allah and living even this day, and will ever be living with the people. So, it is that we kill them alive when we belie the Signs of Allah they brought with them by Allah’s permission. All the Prophets have come to their brethren with the following admonition: “I am a messenger and a Warner from Allah, the God of the worlds; there is no God for you but Him; so fear Allah and behave.” Since all the Prophets aren’t dead and shall not be considered dead, their Warnings hold good even this day; and, every Prophet is living with us all the time. If we want any good things to happen in this life for us, then we surely know all good comes from Allah (4.78 & 79). Then, we shall not worship or associate the worldly things, and the men and the matters about them. If anyone associates people and their materials, and worships them in this earthly life, then it amounts to killing all the Prophets alive every day in his life because of his rejection of the Signs they brought with them by Allah’s leave. So, as far as he is concerned, there is no Warner for him, nor a Guide, nor a Helper, nor a Bringer of Glad tidings for him for life. But they will ever be living with us as the Witnesses. For instance, the Prophet Ayyub: he believed and prostrated to Allah for his long drawn ailments; and, Allah cured him of all his ailments. And thus Prophet Ayyub did live a witness unto the people that they shall not associate or believe anyone, and worship not the doctors as curers of the diseases (21.83, 84;  38.41). But claiming us to be Muslims and then going to doctors to save our lives, we belie Prophet Ayyub and kill his Mission in this world. And, Prophet Ibrahim said, “When I am suffering from diseases it is Allah who cures me (26.80).” And while we claim ourselves a Muslim and a believer in Prophet Ibrahim, we kill Prophet Ibrahim and destroy his mission when we seek the doctors and fall into their hands to save our lives.   
	(259). [3.113] Christians and Jews do not believe in Allah, and hence they are not mentioned here as the ‘The People of the Book’; here, they are ‘The people of Quran’ who believe in Allah, and in His verses, and those who surrender to Him. 
	(260). [3.114] The People of the Book are those who believe in Allah, and in His Quran.
   	(261). [3.123] ‘Badr’ – is a situation where there is an encounter between righteousness and falsehood; and, the party adhering to virtue is tiny in number and weak in physical power (8.26). The opposite situation is ‘Hunain’ (9.25) in which the people in righteousness were huge in numbers with physical strength surpassing the adherents of falsehood. In the former situation, Badr, Allah’s help came because they turned to Allah in total submission; but, in the latter instance, their enormous numbers made them boastful, and forgetful of Allah, and that their great numbers and their might availed them nothing. 
	(262). [3.140] Allah raises us as bearers of the witness as we believe and abide by the Truth through enduring patience all our lives; and, Allah purifies us during our testing periods.
	(263). [3.142] Belief and patience go hand in hand marching towards life of paradise; and, disbelief and despair is another nexus that leads finally to willful self-destruction.                              
	(264). [3.145] Refer to (35.11; 57.22).
	(265). [3.147] Refer to (39.53; 2.186)
	(266). [3.148] Refer to (39.35)
	(267). [3.165] Allah knows what we have left behind us, and what we have sent forth from the time of our birth, until the last day, awaiting Allah’s just recompense. We err and sin, unmindful of Allah all through our lives while Allah has been Patient on us; He warns us through minor untoward incidences, and warnings and advice to ward off from near and far; but, we stand by our arrogance and self-provided immunity; but, Allah has power over all things. None of our misdeeds and evil works shall escape His record of us. And many more incidences and accidents are shaping up by the leave of Allah from about us, ready to befall us; they only await Allah’s command to seize us. And when Allah allows a misfortune to touch you, let us understand, it is only a bit of or a half of the likeness of what we had caused on others. Allah is Seer, Avenger.
	(268). [3.179] Refer to (11.120)
	(269). [3.181] Refer to (2.91)  
    	All the Prophets and the Messengers are not to be considered dead and that we shall not say ‘they are dead ones.' They are being fed and honoured by Allah, and will ever be living. So, we kill them alive when we belie them. All the Prophets have come to their brethren with the following admonition: “I am a Messenger and a Warner from Allah, the God of the worlds; there is no God for you but Him; so, fear Allah, and behave.” Since all the Prophets are alive, their warnings and admonitions hold good for all humanity until the Last Day. If we want any good things to happen in this life, then we surely know all the good comes only from Allah (4.79; 16.53). We shall not worship any of the created things, the men, and their materials. If we do so, then it is akin to killing all the  Prophets alive every day in our life by belying their mission. You cannot kill them for they are raised into eternal living. For instance the Prophet Ayyub: He believed and prostrated to Allah for his long drawn ailments; and, Allah cured him of his afflictions. And thus Prophet Ayyub did live a witness unto the people not to associate or believe and worship the doctors as curers of your diseases (21.83, 84;  38.41). But claiming us to be Muslims, and then going to the doctors to save your lives, you belie Prophet Ayyub and kill him and his mission in this world. And Prophet Ibrahim said, “When I suffer from ill-health it is Allah who cures me (26.80).” As a Muslim and believer in the Prophet Ibrahim, we belie the Prophet Ibrahim and kill him and his mission alive when we seek the help of doctors, associating them as partners to Allah, and then fall into their hands to save our lives. 
	(270). [3.183] Ibrahim's Warnings and admonitions were put to the test of fire before (21:68).
	(271). [3.186] Who are these that were given the Book earlier, but still living with us, teasing and abusing us for holding the Book? Those who followed the Book received the Forgiveness from Allah, and His Mercy took over their poverty - thus they were granted what was guaranteed in truth when they abided by Allah. Then, they forgot the Merciful and began to lead the life of their pride, ignoring the Benevolent. What follows next is, Shaitans becoming their close companions; they set them against their brethren who hold on to the Book, remembering Allah more and more.
	(272). [4.3] Allah gives glad tidings to the society that they shall give their sons into marriage to the orphan girls in two, or three or four, depending on the number of male children. If there are two sons in a house, let them get married to two of the orphan girls; if three sons then to the three; if four sons, then to the four of them. Allah’s Command is that there shall never be an orphan girl in any society. That does not mean the married males can take more wives from the orphans. In Allah’s dictum, it is impossible for one to be equitable with more than one wife (4.129).  So, he shall stay with only one, or enough is what his right hand possesses. If any one steps out of this warning and goes ahead with the marriage other than what his right hand possesses, then he shall have to suffer all his life for such transgression.
    (273). [4.7]  An earning family member, the breadwinner on a daily basis of a family, if dies to leave behind his wife, sons, and daughters - what his dear and near relations shall do is to come to the rescue of the bereaved family, suddenly deprived of any income or livelihood. The decree from Allah is that there is a just part to be undertaken by each of the men and the women who are near and dear relations to the deceased shall take good care of every need of his family. And men folks will bear twice the portion of responsibility as that of the women folks.    
	(274). [4.10] In every house, the households take away their share of the money, instead of giving them from their hearts, taking the responsibility of providing care and honour to the bereaved family. They practically devour the properties of the orphans.
	(275). [4.11] There are no mathematical counts and calculations involved in the decree, Allah has set. It is only to see how much people fear Allah and obey Him. It is a share of responsibility the near relations should bear to make up for the losses the deceased had left behind. For example, in the second sentence of the verse, Allah says, “If there are only women, and they are two or more, they shall bear the two-thirds responsibility of what the deceased had left behind.” According to the accountability, it is a matter of debate who shall take up the rest of the one-third? Allah will take care of all of you who obeyed His Command. And, there ends the matter. So, do not get entertained with the human mathematical calculations. 
	(276). [4.12] And Allah is All Knowing, Most Patient. That is the last word of the verse. We do not involve mathematical calculations in this. We fear Allah in our obligation to meet His decree. All that Allah wishes us to see in us is, how expanded our hearts are by His Mercy - or, how constrained they are because of lack of His Mercy.
	(277). [4.16] If the people’s first impulse is to punish anyone for a crime, know that Allah’s very immediate response against the people before even they could get angry is to have Forgiveness and Mercy in their hearts, in the Name of Allah.  
	(278). [4.17] Here Allah shows us clearly as to who He is, without bothering about the instinctive responses towards punishment of the people, however justified they are.
	(279). [4.19] Do not possess women through oppression. You cannot hold women as captive slaves because you have conquered an enemy land; and, consider not the women as spoils of war, never.
    (280). [4.42] All the Prophets and the Messengers were denied and disobeyed because of the human invented hadiths against what the Prophets had brought with them and by which the Messengers that followed stood firm. But the general population had ignorantly propagated the forged crookedness among the people. And that divided one human race into the specks of dust and pieces. One human race had fallen into multiple schisms. Each fallen particle, calling itself a religious community, takes unto them a self-appointed leader to conduct a discreet ritual form in the name of their religious ceremonies. Each leader has a so-called ‘Holy Book of hadiths’ written by their own hands through their imaginations (2.79). No hadith shall hide anything from Allah, on the Last Day.  
    (281). [4.44] The Book, Quran is revealed to humanity in portions and parts from the time man is born, from Adam until the Book got completed with Muhammad. But man, having no knowledge in the wholesomeness of the Book, takes to a part of the Book, or believes in part of its chapters, or holds onto a part of its verses. These are the people who cause crookedness in the Straight path of Allah and wish to deviate the people away from the Book in its entirety. 
    (282). [4.47] ‘before We change and turn your faces to your backs…’ Allah says if you are a believer, then look forward to what is in the offing for you. We only have the future to our remaining life, and not the present or the past life. It is worthless to bring the past life to the present or the future; and, we do not know what kind of world is going to be for us in the next moment, and how we are going to face it because we have no knowledge of the very next life. At this point, an anxious moment grips our hearts and then relaxes by His Grace, which indicates that Allah has granted a reason and a Way from His Wisdom to sail through, warding off the distressing pathways. And, if we do not find such a Grace from God, our faces will be dark and gloomy, for our faces have been turned back to be glued to, and to believe only in the knowledge of the past, dead, and dreaded days; and, without an element of the Wisdom from Allah, which alone shall make our faces turn in shine to face the Straight Path.
	(283). [4.77] With fear for Allah, and without fear of men, we have to face with determination any injustice even if it is of the size of a date-thread, for, to such of them who contend the wrongdoers, the future life is to be heavenly-beauteous.   
	(284). [4.85] In a community, or in a habitation, or in an individual Allah brings about His Mercy and His Punishment in alternation as only a test for the people to praise Allah’s Glory and to seek His Forgiveness. They both are direct intercessions in a noble cause. On the other hand, without remembering Allah and praising His Glory, if we rejoice at the good fortune Allah had bestowed upon us, then we are boastful (57/23). Allah does not love the boastful; being boastful and arrogant is a very evil intercession on our behalf.
	(285). [4.87] Hadiths are the truthful information revealed by Allah to the people who look up to Him on anything and everything, terrestrial or extraterrestrial.
    (286). [4.90] This verse speaks about how a believer in Allah should conduct and behave with the rest of the disbelieving population. A believer in Allah shall take account of the hearts of the people irrespective of their religions, their religious appearances or their ritualistic practices. The above verse endorses the right attitude to be practised religiously, dignifying your conscience that satisfies The MostHigh, Allah.
	(287). [4.103] Allah sends down His Will upon the hearts of humankind, without letting up through every inspiration all our life; and, every 'Will' is bounteous of His Treasures, never to let go off our hands. As He reveals the treasures of His Bounties to us, it happens in a flash, and at that fraction of the moment, our hearts become calm and peaceful. Normally, we feel this peace of mind very transiently that we either lose the 'Light of Revelation - The Wahi' then and there or stay in that thought only for a little while. So, we tend to dismiss The Wahi, unmindfully, as freaky imaginations; this great loss is because of not being in the constant remembrance of Allah or not being in prayerfulness.  In every fraction of our inspiration, we are revealed of the Will of Allah with 'Peace or the word of Salam' from Him. This 'Salam' will be much felt by us off and on, at times of high stress due to fear or anxiety when we will always be prayerful, remembering Allah constantly in our each breath.
		It is Allah who says ‘Salam - Peace‘ to us while we are anxious, in the first; and then, not realising it is the word of God, we, in prayer, seek the same from the Almighty; we think it is our feeling and our need. And unless we submit to Allah that we need peace, He would not know our need at all; it is how we fail to think and deviate for want of comprehension. If only we are thankful to Allah, by reminding us that all the good comes from Him alone, then each of us shall know and respond to Allah as He blesses our hearts with Peace, thus: "O Allah, there is none but You to grant me, Salam. I surrender myself to You for peace; make me a Muslim unto You alone; and, increase my 'Iman - the belief’ in Your Word. Make me a Mumin unto You.” And only to this committed surrendering or prostration or ‘Sujud’ to the Will of Allah, we receive the guidance from Him. Allah is ever nearer to us than our life; and, who so believes in this, and being in prayerfulness all the time, shall intercede with Allah on his behalf. Allah answers the call of such callers when he calls on Him.
		On the contrary, those who involve in the ritual prayer, they are like deaf, blind and dumb to His time of revelation, and that we ignore His call on us. Allah is ever Watcher over our hearts, and we cannot cheat Him by the body languages of the ritual prayers. Their prayers are an exhibition to others while Allah is cognizant of what is in the breasts of each of us. Humankind is unlikely to falter in responding to the Call of Allah, and shall not miss out on time, if only they stay prayerful in their souls. 
		For example, Allah ordains upon us, “Fear Me, over your anger!” It is a timed ordinance – unless we are believers and have a fear of Allah, we are likely to fall prey to our Satanic influences and become angry with others. Unless we observe our obedience and timed prostration to the Command of Allah, or, are being prayerful, or in the constant prayer, there, we lose our conscience. If we fear Allah, there is no need to worry about anything or anyone in the world. Peace and protection from Allah follow us wherever we go, for Allah is the Keeper over His bondmen.
	(288). [4.105] The court or justice system of the world, neither having the Light of conscience, nor possessing the Luminous Book of humanity, has made it mandatory in its Law that advocates shall knowingly plead on behalf of the traitors and the treacherous.
    (289). [4.119] The life source for the man in the skies and the earth are the air, the water, and the food. The life force of the wind is generated from its elements or the unknown treasures that make up nature around each human being. The clouds again are formed by the command of God, and not from anything that we know or know not. And there is no water to the earth without the cloud and the fresh air that bursts out of it, causing the breeze and the downpour of rain. But satanic science corrupts the weather, poisoning the air and the clouds with its dangerous chemicals such as silver iodide, acetone, propane, potassium iodide, dry carbon dioxide, liquid nitrogen and more. And then the genetically modified foods of satanic science are there, mutilating the life force, destroying the air, water, and the food.
	(290). [4.127] O, men! Fear Allah while judging women; only women shall deliver justice about women (2.178; 4.129). And they too shall fear Allah, for they shall not advance before Allah to pass any order on women; and if we fear Allah, endurance and patience are what is most wanted of us while dealing with women. Wait for Allah to deal with them.
    (291). [4.140] A believer shall never forget the remembrance of the Most Beneficent, lest Shaitan should follow him to cause crookedness in his straight path. The Quran has the Words, the Promises, the Guidance, the Glad tidings, the Warnings, the Admonitions, His Forgiveness and Mercy, and the Signs of them all. No believer shall deviate from the verses of Allah, which shall assuredly swerve him from the Most Beneficent. If anyone slights the verses of Quran and indulges in vain talks and sinful discourses involving in speeches other than the reminders sent down to humanity through Quran, Allah admonishes the believers not to sit with them, lest they become one among them.  
	(292). [4.149] Those who do such righteous deeds, their hearts are graced and blessed by Allah with such of His attributes – the attributes of Forgiving and Mightiness. 
	(293). [4.150] Most ‘muslims’ believe and follow-through the hadiths in the name of Prophet Muhammad, either ignoring or rejecting every other prophet - almost all of them. They do not even follow Prophet Isa, in that he brought to life even the dead from the grave by the leave of Allah.  Denying the Sign of Isa, the Muslims believe not Allah, not the Signs of His Prophets nor His Messengers, but in the doctors as ‘Saviours of their lives’ than believing in Allah when it comes to life and death.
	(294). [4.151] The punishment is disgrace and great suffering, mentally and physically, financially and socially (6.42; 7.94).
    (295). [4.152] Anyone who fears and safety from the disgrace, severe punishment and social kick out as it happens to the so-called 'muslims today', by what Allah has forewarned and decreed upon such of them, who ‘adhere’ to only one messenger, and turn away from all the other messengers, then let them then follow Isa and the Taurat and Injeel (3.55) as is ordained in the Quran. Allah will make such Muslims exalted above every disbelieving Muslims, Jews, Christians and Sabians (2.62) in all the worlds. Allah will forgive the ‘Muslims-to-be’ and shower them with His Mercy.
	(296). [4.154] Refer to (2.63)
	(297). [4.155] Refer to (2.91)
   	(298). [4.158] Allah raised Isa’s wisdom high that the infidels could never reach up to his heights to face even Isa, let alone seizing him. There is no mention in the Quran that Isa was a known public figure interacting with the masses as happens in the life of Prophet Musa. But Isa’s life was that he should deliver Allah’s grand Signs to the people nigh and around, and without much publicity, keeping a low profile at the same time. The word of Allah spread so fast, far and wide, when he carried with him the Taurat of Musa, conforming to what was given to Musa and denying the corrupted Scripture the Jews held at hand, and at that, confirming the Injeel. There have always been the hypocrites who knew-well the Scriptures taught, and the Signs shown to them, but speak to the public, and gather them all around them making them believe that whatever they speak and preach as their own. The Jews picked him up to be Isa and crucified him, and they call him Jesus, not Isa.
		It is imperative to know that someone was made similar to Isa’s physical appearance, by Allah, whom the Jews mistook to be Isa. 
	(299). [4.159] People whose ‘hearts’ die in disbelief, long before his death – they die because of their anxiety, apprehension, and fear, against the peace and tranquillity ensured by Allah all through their lives. Thus they are dead by their hearts, long before their real death; at the time of their true death, on seeing it before their eyes, the truth re-emerges from their souls saying: Wish a rebirth! At this, they will surely long for it, and they would say: "Give us another life, and we will become believers and do good deeds. But it is not to be so.  In every one, at the time of death this truth will loom large before them, making them dearly wish for a new life, believing in it totally – it is because of the existence of the Truth, Isa, the son of Maryam, the messenger and the prophet of Allah, who had demonstrated by Allah's leave, when he made the dead rise from the grave, the greatest Sign and the proof of Allah, for the absolute belief. who so wishes for a new birth at the last Hour because they were disbelievers in Isa, the messenger, and the prophet, all their lives, even as they possessed the Book, will cry on the Last Moments, for a re-birth (25.30). But Isa, of the messengers, would stand witness against them and say: "God, my people had disbelieved in this ayat (3.55) of Quran."
		Prayer: O Allah, the God of the worlds! Make me a believer in Isa, and make me a believer in all of the prophets; and, I am not to be among those who differentiated among the prophets.
    (300). [4.160] Most people in the world are suffering from the food caused problems; they cannot eat what they want because all the agreeable provisions do not go with them; this is because knowingly or unknowingly they are hindering others from Allah’s way, as the Jews have been doing unto the world. This is such a great sin before Allah that He had made the most beautiful provisions as forbidden for life, for generations. 
	(301). [5.2]  Purity is restraining from opting for extreme profits of this worldly things and then associating these to their secured future.
    (302). [5.3] The Blood is haram or harmful because at any given point of time it contains urine and poisonous materials with their live evil energy; therefore, all the 24 hours, the blood is subjected to the kidneys for a continuous cleansing process. The livestock when slaughtered by neck properly with a sharp knife that causes no abrasions or crushing of arteries, all blood from every bodily part flows out of them with the last remnant of blood in them. But, apart from this way of slaughtering, any other form of death caused to the livestock, as mentioned in the above verse, is detrimental. The blood remains as clots and jellies in their fleshes and in all of their tiny blood vessels, which is forbidden for consumption, for their fleshes now contain urine, harmful materials, and their active evil energies, which will cause all forms of allergies from the skin to bones. And indigestion problems will develop leading later on to liver, lung and kidney failures. People generally suck the bone marrow, chew and taste it, but they are haram too. Based on the fact that the bone marrow is the main organ of blood production, and the other organ being spleen, both these parts of the cattle also are haram. Likewise, the kidneys, and the entire gastrointestinal system lodging in it the excretory products; and, haram is the blood organs, the heart, and the lungs; What remains as beneficial to our mind and body is the flesh of the cattle and nothing else of them. The liver of the animals is another harmful organ to eat, for all the toxins that we inhale through breathing, drinking, and eating are aggregated in the liver for detoxification; but, most dangerous materials get lodged in it without proper assimilation and excretion.   
                      	And above all, the skin of the birds are again the most significant excretory organ with its perspiration and radiation of heat energy; we usually consume the roasted skin of the barbecued or the grilled chicken; it is better to avoid skin of the birds to stay healthy. 
	(303). [5.12] The twelve leaders to the descendants of Israel were, the guiding leaders chosen from among them by Allah, to water them; and, to show them the source of water, the creative life-source. 
	(304). [5.13] The verses of the scripture are for the guidance of the person who looks up to it; the bottom line for the comprehension of every word and verse of the scripture is the presenting situation of an individual who seeks the help and protection from his God to save him and conduct him in His straight path. But they ignored the real-time, contextual comprehension of the verses; instead, resorted to a distorted and distant-timeline in the history, for the verses of scripture; thus the rejecters broke a part of the covenant and rendered the scripture as futile (2.161).   
	(305). [5.14] Among the Christians, or Believers, or Jews, who so believe in Allah and the Last Day, and work good - they shall neither fear nor grieve. So, a Muslim shall have no differences in conduct with the Jews, or the Christians, or the Muslims, or the people of other faiths. So, let the people leave the judgement with Allah and behave well with the people in the way that pleases Allah.
    (306). [5.15] Here Allah describes in the present tense about messengers being with each people of various communities, speaking different languages (14.4) chosen from among the people of each community in every town - in every city and capital of all nations. That means there had always been messengers before all over the world, there are messengers now all over the world, and there will ever be messengers all over the world, speaking ethnic languages foreign to Arabic. And they will be known only to those who have the wisdom of the Book and to whom Allah alone (13.43) shall be the witness. Wisdom has no language for it is the Truth itself which has to be felt, perceived, to be believed, to be ascertained through the Signs, by which the belief shall further strengthen one’s identity in the path of Allah, so naturally. Such a nature becomes the inherently distinct quality of anyone with the wisdom of the Book for which Allah stands the only witness. The clear Sign of such people of wisdom is that they see their entire future crossing the boundaries of the present worldly life as luminous. Such are the messengers chosen by Allah, from among every ethnicity.
    (307). [5.27] Adam is the first population of Humanity created on the earth, and then the regeneration of humankind through re-creation (29.20); and, they became the descendants of Adam. The above narration is an example of instances happening between any two religions, or two groups, or two individuals, or between the brothers as the behaviour of the general population, among the descendants of Adam. When anyone is bestowed with the grace of Allah, because of his striving in His cause, the other who is an obvious rejecter of Allah’s Path, becomes envious and grows even to the extent of becoming a killer. The nearness to Allah is possible only when we sacrifice the beliefs of this worldly ways and means of survival, or when we sacrifice setting up the association to Allah, but look up to Allah alone steadfast by His leave, for a glorious life thereafter.
	(308). [5.28] If we fear our God we will not react to the worldly misdeeds, but respond responsibly, that would please the Almighty, the Most Forgiving.
    (309). [5.31] Everyone shall pay for his sin and transgression for Allah shows them not a way of escape from their crime and punishment. We shall know that though the escape way is so close and simple, we will be blinded to it until we are caught and made to regret, for life, for having been blind.
    (310). [5.34] Prayer: O The Forgiving, The Merciful, grant us of your Forgiveness and Mercy, before you give us authority over them, so that we will be forbearing, shall not advance before you, and thus become transgressors as we receive the kingdom from You.
    (311). [5.36] Knowing that Allah is the only Saviour from all the afflictions and distresses that we had set upon us and that our redemption is when we turn to Him alone. We associate doctors as the curers and healers, and appoint them for our diseases and afflictions-free life on the earth, in His stead. They show the people spending much of their wealth (4.38), (8.47), funding the hospitals and the doctors. That is enough a sin, that we enter into our hell-hole, till our lives are captured by the angels on the prescribed Hour. (8.50) If you could see, when the angels take the souls of the Unbelievers at death, how they smite their faces and their backs, saying: "Taste the penalty of the blazing Fire”
	(312). [5.37] Those who are visiting the doctors and dwelling in the hospitals showing others the way to stay healthy, because they have the world of wealth shall know their business shall drop, and the wealth slips away. And, their health dips and their diseases deepen and become widespread, and at that, they begin to realise the torment of the treatment at the hands of the doctors and would wish to get away, not knowing it is a one-way hellhole. However strongly they express their anguish and agony in the hellhole and struggle to get out of the hospital, their relatives are there to push him down there to settle until their life ends in utmost torment and cries. Fear Allah; He is the One, none but He, for us, from the beginning of our lives to the death, and for our Hereafter.
	(313). [5.38] Cutting their hands off does not mean maiming, but it is restricting their hands from public life. In other words, arresting and imprisoning. That is not to take the law into your hands, but to entrust them with the authorities of the Law and Order. If you take the meaning literally and cut off their hands, there is no meaning to the following verse,
	(314). [5.39] Physically punishing a person is only with Allah, for He punishes whom He wills and Forgives whom He wills. 
    (315). [5.46] This verse stresses the decree upon every Prophet that they shall follow the scripture sent down to the Prophets before them and for the people before them. For example here, Isa, son of Maryam was asked to obey the Taurat sent down to the prophet Musa, and for the people before him, the descendants of Israel. Likewise, Musa was asked to submit to the scripture sent down upon the Prophet before him for the people, before him. To confirm the scripture, given before, Allah gave Musa, the Taurat; and for Isa, son of Maryam, the Injeel to confirm the Taurat, sent down to the people before him. Finally, to the last Prophet, Muhammad, Allah reveals Quran to verify all the Scriptures, given to every Prophet, from the first Prophet to the Prophet, Esa, the possessor of both the Taurat and Injeel. The distinguishing ability, the ‘Furqaan’ from Allah (3.3 , 3.4) has been inspired into the hearts of every individual, as Ruh, or Soul by Allah that shall have to be used as the criterion, individually, to extract the Proof of God comprehensively, from every word of the scripture (4.82), and to beat up the attempts to divert the sense, and  to preserve the verses.
    (316). [5.47] The people of Injeel are today’s Christians who are to follow Taurat and Injeel together. Similarly, the people of Quran today are to reflect the Taurat, and Injeel incorporated in Quran; and we are required to use our Furqaan, the distinguishing, to our ability, by Allah’s Guidance; Allah’s help is so near when we seek His help while reflecting, using the Criterion, the distinguishing Furqaan. The Furqaan, the Discerning in one’s Ruh, individualises and customises the Quran, Injeel and the Taurat in one go; unless we follow all these, we do not get anywhere nearer to Allah, His Forgiveness, and Guidance (5.68).
	(317). [5.48] To each of 8 billion people in the world, by His Grace, there is the distinctly separate path, individualised to him. Follow Allah as an individual creation and not as a congregation, or groups of religious populations; and, believe that it is for Him to guide you all your life, strengthening your belief and gratitude towards Him with His Signs.
	(318). [5.51] While you, the believers, knowing God is your only Protector and Helper, you shall not submit to them who demand your subjugation; they demand this because of their rude pride and their inordinate desire to make the world a slave to them. Some had already fallen to their oppression, whom Allah had left astray.
	(319). [5.83] Here, this ayat speaks to all people, as to the way how the hearts of the people of faith and gratitude will be moved when they happen to listen to the Truth through their messengers; each community, and nation would identify its messengers chosen from them by Allah. And, with thankfulness they remember their God in their souls dearer than their lives; and, tears overflow because of their God’s Mercy, Wisdom, and the Light bestowed upon them.  
	(320). [5.94] Hunting by hands and spear: Hunting by hands indicate your brute ‘physical’ strength which urges you to subdue and sack the weak; and, the ‘spear’ denotes the sharpness of your ‘physical’ brain by which you outsmart, overreach and trample the humble and honest ones. Soon will Allah make known their secret plans and transgression in the open, perchance they repent; but, after this, if they continue in their dishonest devising, Allah shall make them taste a painful and disgracing torment.
	(321). [5.96] Hunting in the sea is allowed, but not hunting on the land - hunting in the sea is permitted and lawful because the voyagers in the ship are on a journey to a faraway land. It is just and fair that your voyager-ship shall have rooms for storage of the foods enough to contain in just amounts; and, the sea is ninety percent more enormous than land, and its depth and vastness are incalculable. Allah has graced the sea with such bounties that however much you hunt in it, you cannot pump the ocean dry, but retire yourself, tired. Hence, it is allowed for you to shoot in the sea, but unlawful it is to kill and steal on the land which keeps giving the provisions in fair amounts, freshly, and seasonally, - and in bountiful measures for all the people in the world, by the command of Allah. One cannot plunder in the land and deprive the rest of the people of their right to the bounties of the land by loot and squander - especially when you seek from Allah, purity for your souls, in His path.
	(322). [5.112] The ignorant are those who cannot understand that their earth itself is a platter, holding all kinds of fruits and foods at this moment are from the skies, created by Allah.
    (323). [5.113] Every day’s food we consume is from the earth’s surface which is the grandest, the greatest and the vastest of all platters in which the seeds gather, germinate and grow into all kinds of fruits and food - sent down by Allah from the heavens above. But the ignorant ask for a small platter directly from the skies to see to believe that Allah creates all food from what they know not. Let us be aware of it that every plate of food from this earth’s platter is God’s creation from the heaven above. And we shall show our gratitude to Him by distributing them all among the humankind; if we do so, each day shall be a festive day and a feasting day for all the population till the Last Day. Allah has thus created us as honoured guests by making us born in this world. But shaitan introduced the money and the finance for the food, and the feast from Allah became fasting and starving without even a plate of food for the households for days; this is a deterrent for those who sell the foods. And we see billions of people in the world starving, begging, laying on the pavements - a sure punishment from Allah; today we shall awaken to this ‘Truth come True” from Allah and fear Him. It is time we form a government and vote for them, who have the sense not to sell the provisions of God's platter, the earth.If we do not stop selling the produces of the soil from this day, then listen to what Allah says in the following verse (5.115).
    (324). [5.114] Isa, son of Maryam, is left with no option but to turn to Allah for the sake of the ignorant to show His Signs for their naked eyes. But Allah warns before accepting Isa’s submission. But they did not make a distribution of His platter to the people; instead, they chose to finance with the food, control the food from reaching the public and clandestinely plotted against the people, to make them their slaves. Even the so-called Muslim nations are touching and grabbing the forbidden trees which are meant for all the world. That is the reason why Allah has chosen to punish the Muslim world, to begin with, with starving and disgrace. Soon Allah shall seize the globe with even severer punishment if the people of the world continue to choose shaitans as their leaders who touch the trees and grab the provisions of it.    
	(325). [6.1] Desist from the quest of pride in this world, for all Praise belongs to Allah 
    (326). [6.2] Our physical body is a creation from clay, for which there is a period by which its existence will come to an end; and, there is the mind and soul breathed into him, by Him, for a time fixed, leaving nothing on our strides. Say, “All Glory be to Him.” And, no doubt our lives will be far above and ahead of those who doubt.
	(327). [6.3] Allahu means “The None, Him.” Here is the derivation: Al means ‘The’. La means ‘No’. Hu means ‘Him.” He is “The none, but Him,” in the skies and the earth.
    (328). [6.4] The breathing in of the soul and the command of the mind in our being is to observe the Signs of the Truth, invisible. But not the hearts of most pay any regard for the same. Without the truth backing our thoughts and actions, we overlook or deny the Signs of caution and restraint, that we have to end up on the wrong side, suffering adversities. That is the Sign of our pride that makes us ride the rough weather.
	(329). [6.5] Restraining from ridiculing or making fun of people saves our lives from afflictions to the mind and body. 
	(330). [6.11] Open up the window and see the outside world, or switch on the TV, and you will see the Signs of the verses happening right before your eyes.
	(331). [6.12] He will raise us up on the appointed day for each, gathering all our deeds, in the skies and the earth, missing out nought in aught. 
	(332). [6.13] Our every work, however trivial or big, good or evil, concealed in mind or openly done, takes to its formations and transformations as recompense, in spatial relationships. They happen as events in the skies and the earth, and by night and day. 
	(333). [6.19] (13.43) and (6.19) stress the Truth that the Quran is a Spacial Expression of Creation to those who reflect upon their very existence in the vastness of space. The prophets are chosen to explain clearly to them and the others, the very Truth in their souls. Before the Quran is physically expressed, in parts, little by little, through the chosen Prophets and Messengers, it is inscribed in each one’s soul, as Allah breathes His Ruh, at birth. There are people who live by it; there are people who can remember when they are reminded of it - such are the witnesses to the Quran; and, there are people who have rejected the Quran, thereby their souls forever, living defiantly against their lives.	
	(334). [6.73] The truth behind the creation of the heavens and the earth and all in between is, according to every verse of Quran that informs us about them - to feed us, to protect us, to repay us for our deeds, and to make us reflect. For example, we are living in free and unbounded life energy that encompasses all universes in the limitless, vast expanding space. And, surrounding each of us is always the air of atmosphere, decreed by a word Be! from God, as repay, specific and discrete to every individual's mental activity as against or in favour of each of His Attributes. And at any given moment, we either do well or die-hard according to our rejection or adherence to the God's Qualities in our souls. Allah is swift to reckon and retribute.
	(335). [6.75] Then Ibrahim shifted his attention from the idols of the land to contemplate on those in the heavens above, for there were people then, who were worshipping the Stars, the Moon, and the Sun. But then Ibrahim's intense search for the truth of them all, over a period, led him to reject all the gods as Allah guided him aright, and tells those people he is clear of them. 
	(336). [6.78] From (6.75) to (6.78) Allah reveals how He taught and guided His servant Ibrahim slowly over time, to make him gain His wisdom above the earthy knowledge of the people of his community who were then as different tribes worshipping the Stars, the Moon and the Sun as their Gods. By Allah, Ibrahim was applying his scrutiny, the criterion to determine his ‘belief-course’ and crossed through the concepts of all the gods one after another, such as the Star, the Moon and the Sun, so thoughtfully that he ultimately discerned for good, that nothing created shall be a God. But the One Creator of all that is in the heavens and the earth, The God. Then Allah teaches Ibrahim about Himself, Allah. Be all praise to Allah, the God of all the worlds.
		Like the yesteryears, this day we find the Hindu society as belonging to Ibrahim’s religion such as idolatry, the many deities; worshipping the Stars, the Moon, and the Sun, and Everything on the earth and in the skies as their Gods. And like Ibrahim, they invariably are shifting from one belief to another, and finally, they take the Quran for guidance, believing in Allah. The sure and real descendants of Ibrahim are presented here in the Indian sub-continent. 
	(337). [6.91] It has been the history of the people of every community, from the beginning, to reject their Prophets and crying lies to the luminous Book given to them. And until death touched them, the arrogant and powerful among them stood in obstinate rebellion against them. What happens then is the leaders began praising the Prophet and wrote down the history of them with their own hands, mixing in it a particular ripped portion from the textual contents of the Book and idolised them as Gods. Their histories, with the scattered pieces of the Book, later on, made the Scriptures. But then there were the prudent people, who by Allah's Grace followed their prophets' Book in truth and diligently guided those who showed inclination. And of them, Allah chooses His Messengers, after every Prophet, sending them to the capital city of each community, and in every language who will testify to the entire Original Book brought by their Prophets. Thus after each Prophet's work is over, the Messengers who were chosen by Allah to follow them (3:81), spread the Message of the Original Book brought by their Prophet far and wide. Then the next Prophet arrives with fresh Message along with the earlier Scriptural contents given to the Prophets before. Then the Messengers followed, and thus the whole Quran in completed with the last and the Final Prophet Muhammad. And the Messengers to be would support and testify, after the last and final Prophet, till the day of Qiamah, the end of the world.
		And as was the practice of the disbelievers who had rebelled against the Prophets continue to write about them after their deaths, write down the texts, ripped off the Original Scriptures, and spread their Books, as the Scriptures from their God. Thus all the human hand written Books shall contain in them all the parts of the Holy Quran. 
	(338). [6.95] The land, dead due to the famine and the lush quivering after the rain is a Sign that Allah brings forth life from the dead. And, the provisions and the foods that we consume are harvested out or cut, then boiled and cooked, and roasted and grilled in the fire, giving us life-energy is yet another Sign, Allah brings forth life from the dead. Going by the truth that every created being will die on its prescribed Hour, reveals that Allah brings forth death from the living.
	(339). [6.99] Allah starts the verse mentioning Him as He, and then, all through the paragraph, the mentioning goes as 'We'. 'He' indicates the Unseen ‘One', while the word 'We' indicates that He is joining with us in fashioning the produce and the fruits according to our need. The more grateful we are to Him, the more will be our soliciting and seeking the best of everything He produces for us, each of which again are different from each other. But often we tend to ignore such prayers to our God, while the waiting period for the fruits to ripen passes away, fruitlessly. So today we find almost every fruit of all kinds not ripened to our taste and that they are sourish and bitter.    
    (340). [6.107] Do people have this question: why has Allah created heaven and hell? And why has He created the good and bad? And why did He give us the mind to choose? For all these questions the above verse is the clear answer for those who receive the discerning from Allah. To everyone, if this ‘one-way’ question is asked: Whether you want a much better, a more beautiful life or a heavenly life tomorrow, they would say: Yes. But on the other hand, if it is said to them: If you want a worse and more frustrating life tomorrow, they should say: No. Again, when they are given to choose between hell and heaven, they would choose heaven in a flash; and on the same lines, their choice should work out between the good and the bad. It is the ‘bestowed-predisposition’ by which Allah has set the mind that constantly pushes a man to the better and better life, by the moment. Allah, the creator of our lives, always reminds us of such a greater future which He has fashioned for us; and all that Allah wants us is to believe His words if we are truthful in our belief in Him. But unfortunately, we choose to disbelieve in it. And, with all our consciousness against ‘The Conscience’, we follow our despicably disgusting attitude, and means of our ‘worthless knowledge’ to shape up our deathward and deadly future by our own hands, instead of the surrendering our will to the promised heavenly life, by Allah, the Creator. We, with our heights of pride, boast that the future is in our hands, disdainfully denouncing God, the Most-Relenting. It is the outright rejection of Allah while we know well; and, hell is the abode of such people; Allah has left them to their doom without a protector, without a helper. He has removed the discerning, the Furqaan from their Soul, the Ruh; now their only question all their lives will be is, ‘why has Allah created the heavens and the hell while He knows well we, the grandest of creations. We, the humans, by our acquired evil nature, will opt only for the hell, rejecting Allah’s Wish and Command? And is it that we should willfully strive for heaven, all our lives, leaving the worldly pleasures?’ Such people form the majority population at any given time; if we are to sit with them discussing or arguing over this, then we shall also be of them (4.140).
	(341). [6.108] All people believe in the Forgiveness and Mercy of the All-Knowing - the One Almighty, the Creator; there are many such countless Attributes as His Names; if we remember each of His names in reverence with gratitude, we glorify “Allah” - All Glory Be Unto Him. The Names of Allah are known as the ‘Rubb’ in Arabic, or termed as “The God” in the general tongue; the attributes of Allah, the Rubb, is set as the ‘conscience’ in every soul of a human being. Rubb is always plural denoting the endless Qualities of Allah. Allah means ‘The None but the One God’ of every single attribute, and there is no Rubb other than the One.
		People in general fall into two categories: one section believes in the word Allah without perceiving or knowing their Rubb, i.e., Allah’s Attributes, the God’s. In other words, they merely chant the word, “Allah” without their conscience working on them; this means, they are idol worshipping ‘Allah’ in the ‘sound form’. Such people cannot hear though they have ears; cannot see though they have eyes, and cannot understand though they have the hearts, to follow the call of Allah: His Glad-tiding and Warning! These groups generally form the Muslim world. And there is this another section: they believe in (the Names of the gods or the Rubb), a few or more of the Attributes of Allah, The None But Him - but have failed to dutifully remember every “Goodly-Attribute” as and when the situation calls. “The recognition of the invisible feel and power of Allah '', guiding them all through their lives during sorrow and adversities. They materially conceptualised the Unseen Attributes, and made each of them into symbolic idols, and conjured up all the human concepts into human-made scriptures. Thus multiple ‘gods-beliefs’, with the inevitable polytheism came into existence, to each Attribute of “The One God ''. They are failing to take note: attributes and qualities have no form or shape, but it is ‘The Feel’ of their Conscience, ‘The Soul’ of humanity. When the idols are removed from their minds and recognise them all in the soul as goodly-feel, they are with the real God, Allah.
		Conversely, the so-called monotheistic Muslims do not follow the Attributes, i.e., the Names, or the Gods of Allah in their daily life; neither do they value nor care for those Attributes, the Rubb. Allah has all the most beautiful Names in the heavens and the earth, and call on Him by His Attributes (7.180). For example, O Rubb, the Most Forgiving; O Rubb, The Most Gracious; O Rubb, the Most Merciful; O Rubb, the MostHigh; O Rubb, the Most-Wise and so on. We are to call upon our Rubb thus, remembering Him, with the specific Name concerning the particular need, a glad or a dire situation, and we are not to associate partners to Him by calling upon or revering other than His Attributes. The difference between the Muslims and the non muslims is not much at all; both are associators to God except for their rebelliously steadfast points of views. Here is just one among the numerous examples to show how Allah addresses Himself with One of His Rubb, Ar Rahman: (21.42) Say: "Who can keep you safe by night and by day from the Most Gracious?" They turn away from the mention of their Rubb.” Allah calls Him not as Allah, in this context but as the Most Gracious, The Rubb.  (22.77) “O ye who believe! Humble and surrender yourselves, and call upon your Rubb, God - and do good, that haply ye may prosper.” Here as believers in The Rubb, we call Him by His Name or Attribute, suitable to the prevailing circumstance: O The Most-Wise, The MostHigh. Allah says, call Him by His Beautiful Names and leave them alone who wrongfully neglect.
		Unfortunately, we do not remember our Rubb, but merely call Allah by word or utter the sound form, without remembering Him by His Names as our Rubb; In this way, the Muslims in general neither worship Allah; nor do they revere their Rubb. And coming to the non muslims they have made their Rubb into visible icons and idols, and fall prey to their inventions. Muslims and non muslims are not on different platforms but the same.
		In (6.108), Allah puts both these groups as one and says to them both: Do not insult others’ Gods, for they are the Names of Me, the One Allah. They are idol worshipping the one or the other of the Names of Allah, the Rubb; if you do so, without a thought, they will insult Allah as a whole, which means, they unintentionally insult every name of Allah, calling evil words. Allah is Merciful upon both of you, parties! If you persist in abusing their gods, their rubb, then know that you inadvertently abet insulting one or the other Names of Allah, and for this, I will make you accountable for what you do. I have warned you, Satan has made this evil work fair-seeming to all the communities, and will set you upon each other to meet your catastrophe.  
	(342). [6.111] They are the shaitans! And Allah has deserted them; most of them are the despised, wandering vagabonds, living on the payrolls of the wicked, and dangerous criminals around us. Such are the Shaitans, the enemies of the truthful and the dignified.
	(343). [6.121] When we strive to earn for the benefits of our eyes or mouth or any of the God-endowed five special senses, feel assured that Allah's Grace is invoked upon them all. By remembering one or more of His Names in every one of our deeds, we are heartened that Allah has taken over our works upon Himself. So, our hearts are at peace concerning the present, past and the future, and nothing to worry about the consequences of our activities at all.
	(344). [6.122] Every person in the depth of the darkest recesses is he, whom Allah has abandoned, are the stooges for the Shaitans among the men and jinns. They are Shaitans, indeed.
	(345). [6.128] That is how the picture will be when they are brought before their God: They will say plainly what they were doing, acknowledging beforehand their verdict: 'Hell!' 
	(346). [6.131] Long before the destruction of a town because of its criminals' inhabitation, Allah warns and makes the good-doers to move away for a while from their dwelling places. And Allah warns the believers during the times when they face the contemptuous hardcore criminals that they shall pray thus: (23.93) Say, “My God if You are to show me what they are promised;- (23.94) “My God make me not be with the evil ones.”
	(347). [6.138] It is important to note in this verse that it is the Muslims who claim to be believers in Allah, behaved in this manner. Generally, every community invents its religious leader whom they shall appoint as their guide, even as Allah warns in Quran, there is no guide except Him, and His Leadership is the Guidance. We shall distance from the so-called all religious leaders of the world, for Allah's Inspiration to direct us first-handed.
	(348). [6.141] A crucial thing to note here is that we should leave a considerable portion of the right crops, vegetations and fruits in the bearings of the trees and plants, and leave the grains in the soils from where we harvest; the quantity that we shall leave in their habitations maybe to the effect of 1/5th of the produce, as Allah commands in Chapter 8 verse 41. Even when you pluck for your daily feed from your backyard gardens, leave 1/5th of it in their bracts. Allah will make the gardens yield more, spread them far and wide, and flourish it generously.
	(349). [6.145] At the end of the verse, Allah tells us His Names as the Most Oft-Relenting and Merciful, and that we shall seek the essentials of such Qualities of Him as to be your nature and disposition when we make sacrifices in the Name of Allah. Without such invoking, or prayer to Allah that we may be blessed with the sense and essence of His Attributes, no offerings are honoured by Allah even though we say, "In the Name of Allah, Rahman and Rahim," and will evoke little response from Him.
	(350). [6.151] This verse (6.151) and the following verse (6.152) comprise the 9 commandments of Torah given to the prophets Musa and Isa. And it is further elaborated in Chapter (17:31-35), The descendants of Israel. 
	(351). [6.155] Refer to (2.2)
	(352). [7.1] These are the initials of the four of the Names of Allah - Alif, is the initial of Aalim, The All-Knowing; Laam, is the initial of Latif, The Most Gentle; Meem is the initial of Mumin, The One Who Imparts Faith; and, Saad, the initial of Sadaq, The Truthful. Therefore what we understand by these Initials of Allah - Alif, Laam, Meem, Saad is: By The Truthful and the One who Imparts Iman, we shall lead a Gentle life of Wisdom in this world.	
	(353). [7.3] While following God and His Book, follow only that which is very clear to your conscience as Revelation of the Truth, in your contemplation and introspection; this is the Guidance from God, direct. This is the God’s Way - for, only God can teach us His Way; if anyone associates allies to God and follows other than Him, they are polytheists and pagans. Unfortunately, very few take to this Guidance while most of them follow their priesthood and their forefathers, thus straying away from their God’s path.
    (354). [7.6] The question to the people is: Did the messenger say to you, ‘you shall take him as God’ besides Allah’? 
		The question to the messengers is: Did you say to the people, ‘they take you as God besides Me’?
	(355). [7.11] Here is the signal revelation that the human beings, when perfected by Allah, are raised in status above the Jinns and Malayikas. Our efforts in the world are to realise in us the rank and station of Adam by adhering to the doctrines as sanctified in the Book.
	(356). [7.12] Racism is out-lawed in Islam.
	(357). [7.13] Pride dispels us from the path of Salam, Islam.
	(358). [7.14] In every single breath, we die and are raised up again, as we inhale the air with the inspiration of Allah, after we have exhaled the air. It happens in all, but very few, despite the obstacles placed by Shaitan, they rise up to the inspirations as they receive them during their inhalation phase of respiration.
	(359). [7.15] Shaitans and their accomplices in men were granted respite till the day of awakening of his bondman about how evil their associates are. And Allah is sure to conduct the patient ones in His path with wisdom as long as they submit them to Him seeking His forgiveness.
	(360). [7.16] Even as we are approaching the fruits of our belief on Allah's Straight Path, Shaitans and their friends in men and women are sure to distract and dishearten us with deceit; keeping vigil on this aspect, and move ahead with patience, without doubt, Allah is with us throwing Shaitans away from around us.
	(361). [7.17] He said to God he would lead us all in the front and would pull us from behind if we turn on the right path. He further challenges Allah directly saying he would sway and swerve us away from His way, right and left. 
	(362). [7.19] Land grabbing with its trees has always been a severe offence all over the world.
    (363). [7.22] Refer (7:11). Adam is not a single person, but the enlightened human beings by the Grace of Allah, who are supposed to lead the Nations in God's way. When they falter, falling to the worldly pleasures and failing to uphold the doctrine of Allah, the whole Nation has fallen from the heights of Glory.
	(364). [7.24] Allah says since we have found our delights from the world higher than that of the heavenly bliss, we shall have to descend from our heights of Glory. And He says that we will be given a life in the lower world, with a limited benefit. And we shall abide therein, to make us feel and understand that the living on the earth is stressful and not as what we thought it could be. Before the end of each of our lives, there will undoubtedly be unwarranted events and incidents mixed all through, making us turn to God for a -hassle-free life. There is the ascent, back again to the glorious world from where we tripped. What we have in our mind as the Unseen world now is the heavenly life and not the existence that fits into the animal instincts of the five senses.
	(365). [7.34] Every moment of our breath is life-serving with a vision about what next is. That continuum of views comes from the Almighty as a Revelation, with a time frame over it, that, either it shall happen His Way or our way, depending upon how much we piously and with gratitude remember Him more than we account our abilities for our actions. And when the time arrives, what we are going to realise is the consequence of the mix - life goes on and on, with the blend of His Benevolence, and our destruction of the same until we die. 
	(366). [7.38] The double punishment is one, for he, having turned away from Allah, and the second, for having caused crookedness in others' straight path. 
	(367). [7.52] We gave ‘them the Book’ -  ‘them’ here refers to those (7.48,49) who were given the Book as guidance and grace from Allah, and who nevertheless did find themselves in hell. The Book is meant to have their wisdom strengthened through the insight, and revelation therein. But they took the verses of the Book for jest (4.140) and vain arguments (6.68), treating its verses with their false, prideful worldly knowledge, mostly inclining toward the freakish, delusive atmosphere. Such is the plight of certain of the chosen people (5.43; 7.169; 42.14) whom Allah has identified in the Quran. Today the people swarming around us are the self-styled religious scholars, the clergies, the spurious leaders of various religious doctrines. They give out ‘fatwas’ in this world and for the next world, denying and disregarding the Truth that to Allah belongs the judgement and the Last Day, and with Him is the Hour of punishment.
	(368). [7.101] Whoever is following error after knowing the right from the wrong, is, without doubt, will be placed fast-paced toward a self-inflicting, severe course of destructive nature.
    (369). [7.102] Every person, day in and day out, lives only by the Mercy and Forgiveness of God, but for a few most people become arrogant ingrates, disowning God. That is because they used to deny and falsify the Signs and the clear Proofs from Allah. 
    (370). [7.136] Hereon is a Sign for us from Allah! Allah, by His decree, has well-spruced this world with everything for the radiance of all humanity to feel the glimpse of the Paradise, promised. We lost the wealth of the high nature's generousness because we touched the tree and grabbed the timber and all the land with it, and boasted ourselves to be the landowners, while we know, to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and earth. And as a reward, Allah makes the universe dull and destroys it by closing the gates of heavens from where the liveliness and livelihood shall descend on it. And that makes the land barren under the scorching heat, to drive the landowners away and that it becomes God's land again as He opens up the heaven's gates. That is one way of taking vengeance on the arrogant landowners and their subjugating people. And floods and earthquakes and afflictions from all nature are yet other ways. And with God is the distressful life for those who do not heed to the Signs from Him.
	(371). [7.157] The Prophet in the above verse describes him as not a believer in the litters of the man invented ‘lettered-knowledge’, but a believer in, and follower of the Wisdom of Allah. Allah has granted him what he pursued of Him, and so, He honours His Prophet-Messenger, unlettered, but Enlightened.
	(372). [7.171] The fear or anxiety in your hearts that good fortunes shall not miss you is an indication that you are keeping guard over all misfortunes, by Allah's Will.
	(373). [7.172] None shall be able to see his own back - Allah Originates a human progeny from sources unknown to us. Allah does create what He wills, and it is that we shall bear witness to this Truth, “There is None but the One, He! And unto Him is our worship, our sacrifice, our life, and our death.” 
	(374). [7.179] Allah creates us from one status to another as He rewards us with what we do; it may be to punish or to place us in a higher form. There is a constant change to each of our creations for the better or worse during every moment of our lives on this earth. As long as we have our insight intact and keep up with our conscience, we are destined for heavens; but if we are otherwise, hell. Allah warns us about those whose fate is hell to make us aware of such people with whom we shall have limited engagement.
    (375). [7.189] Allah created humankind by breathing His Ruh, into the soul, and He created companions for the soul, similarly bearing His Ruh, its function being the Guidance and the grant of Benevolence in Truth, all through one’s life. When they increased in their comforts and pleasures in each others company, they forgot the Grace of the Most Benevolent and thus did they fail in His remembrance and show of gratitude (43.36); so, Shaitan followed them and led them astray making them both carry the burden of the evils that their hands had worked. When they both realised it is beyond their ability to endure the increasing stress any further, they both turned to their God and said, “O, God! If You deliver us of the burden by Your Mercy, we will both be grateful to You.” And Allah accepted their call and delivered them from their misfortunes; but then, they became forgetful and fell for the desires again - this time, committing the worst crime, i.e., they set up partners to Allah.
	(376). [8.12] In a predominantly disbelieving wicked population around the globe from every denomination of all sects and religions such as Islam, Christianity, Judaism, Hinduism, Budhism etc. A believer in One God, in His judgement, in His Angels, His Book and in His Prophets (2.177, 285) - is surviving amidst the thick of the disbelieving populace, because God sent angels to strengthen his soul, mind, heart and feet. To the believers, the critical asset and assertion from God is the support and reinforcement sent through His angels (41.30, 31). And, after our belief in Allah and His Decree, we shall strive to make the malayikas - the angels, friends to us by His Leave. Believing in the Book, the Quran, comes as the 4th requirement, and the 5th and the last is the belief in the Prophets who stood as perfect models to all the previous 4 provisions Allah has made mandatory upon a believer. But the tragedy of a believer lies in that he says he believes in Allah and the Prophet, throwing the other three provisions away ignorantly. Anyone loses Allah’s order who only says, “I believe in Allah and His Prophet.” Say from now onwards as Kalima, the Pledge: I believe in Allah, and I believe in His Last Day, and I believe in His Malayika, the Angels, and I believe in the Book and I believe in the Prophets who we shall believe are not to be considered dead but, forever are the living models of the Book. Belief in this good presence of all the prophets with each of us is possible only if we believe and make the angels as our friends and protectors, by Allah’s permission. 
	(377). [8.13] To save us from the wrath of Allah, believe in His Judgement, in His Angels and His Book before we dare say we believe in the Prophets. 
    (378). [8.14] The torment of fire is eternal for there is no death for them, and their skins will be continuously renewed in such swiftness even as it burns so that one will never see it with their naked eyes. But they will suffer the burning fire in its totality; we see such suffering in billions of people with diabetes who have burning feet and legs, but we do not see any consumption of their skins.
    (379). [8.25] If our wish is to save us from a disastrous day when the wrath of Allah descends on a population, we shall have to strictly put into practice the verses 5.63 and 5.79 all through our lives; we shall fear the chastisement of Allah.
	(380). [8.26]  Call to mind (3.123) - Badr.
	(381). [8.34] Each one has his God-given house, and God expects one and all to be pious and be grateful to Him for the same, so that Allah makes their houses sacred; and, the households would guard the homes as the ‘gift of God’ keeping them close to their hearts as sacred-mosques; no affliction nor adversity would ever touch its people. Its people - wherever they go forth from it, their minds will all the time be circumventing ( tawaf ) the house and the family with piety and heartfelt prayers, wishing their homes to be pure only for Allah.
	(382). [8.48] When the two forces, one fighting in the path of shaitan while the other in the Way of Allah, came face to face, shaitan could see the Malayikas descending in ranks upon those who are in the path of Allah; and, terrified at this shaitan turned on his heels and vanished away. 
	(383). [9.3] The Grand Day of Hajj - is the Day when we meet with great success regarding that which our hearts have wished for, in the Name of Allah, solely by the Permission and Grace of Allah. And we are shown the success, as a Sign from Allah on that moment of the Day - this is the Grand Day of Hajj every one will experience all his life, individually, some day or the other. On such Grand Days of Hajj, it is essential for us to revere Allah more, and take every precaution to dissociate from the associators to Allah.
	(384). [9.5] Sacred months are the amnesty period given to the dreaded criminals to lay down their arms and surrender to the Law; they are rebellions who defy, deny and reject the Law of Land; they cause corruption in the land, and create fear amidst the people who love peaceful living. These are the disobeying unbelievers - the criminals amidst the well-mannered, peace-loving people of a country - they are to be cut off from the society by arrest and sending them to confinement. Such dreaded criminals who elude the law, causing terror in the land shall even be shot at sight by government order. The constitution of the Land shall also bear in mind that Forgiveness and Mercy shall be of paramount importance while framing the Law. Such Sacredness shall have to be the backbone of The Constitution. But if the disbelievers become challengers to the Sacred Constitution itself, and refuse to surrender, despite the offer of amnesty, then, when the proposition of their sacred period is over: shoot at sight and kill them!
	(385). [9.28] We are newly born by the day when we arise after nightly death with renewed insight, and with light upon light; whoever is proud on account of this is dismissed by God as inglorious! And to the believers, Allah says, “Let not the vain ones enter your abode after this year, which means ‘from that moment you come to know of their disgrace’. Every day or moment of life is the beginning, as of a newborn for the believers, i.e. for the believers, every moment is the birth of an epoch of a new aeon. 
	(386). [9.36] The four sacred are: Keeping up Faith in Allah and the Last Day; Forgiving people; showing them the Guidance; and seeking Patience from Allah. That, in essence, is: Believing in Allah and doing Good so that we live in paradises in the hereafter while living justly in this world. That is the straight path of Allah. If you miss out on any of these Four, then you have wronged yourselves.
	(387). [9.78] Allah is the Knower of each of our unseen future that He has inspired into our hearts individually, and He is the One who will make it manifest for us in our everyday life. According to our deeds and efforts to secure our future, unmindful of Allah’s directions of behaviour, either we suffer losses and adversities or receive the Mercy and Favour of Allah, the Most Forgiving.
	(388). [9.107] Today there are different ‘mosques’ for various sections of Muslims who rebel against Allah’s decree in that that you shall not fall into schisms (6.159); each of these mosques is a shelter to those who transgress, and desire dissent and divisions in the path of Allah, and who defied the guidance of His Messengers. But Allah admonishes us not to stand in such mosques and further, Allah guides us to the real Masjid, which is a gift of God to everyone. The houses we dwell are a graceful gift from Him that we shall faithfully and devotedly glorify His Names in them so that God purifies our hearts from all evils, guiding us in the straight path towards our blessed houses - the ‘Bait ul haram’. 
	(389). [10.1]  'Alif, Laam, Raa - These are the initials of the Wisdom of the Book - 
	'Alif' is the first letter of His Name, the' Ahad,' i.e., the None but the One.' 
	'Laam' is the first letter of His Name, the 'Lathif,' i.e., the 'Gentle'. 
	'Raa' is the first letter of His Name, the 'Ru'ya' which means, the 'Insight'. 
	Therefore all the three initials put together, the meaning of Alif, Laam, Raa is: There is no God but He, the One, the Most Gentle who imparts us the Insight. 
	(390). [10.11] Your patience will bring you the best from your deeds, cancelling the bad, and reform your thoughts, informing.
	(391). [10.12] The ill fortune is because of the misadventure one undertakes all his life, forgetting faithlessly, his refuge in his God.
	(392). [10.13] When corruption in any land becomes the rule, and law - the entire nation is on edge, to face the wrath of Nature, by God.
	(393). [10.18] That is the evidence to wake us up to the truth that everything we worship other than the One Almighty, residing in our Soul, is nothing but the caricature of our avarice and low desires. In other words, we each are Gods to ourselves.
	(394). [10.22] Prayers bear fruits only when one does it as heart to heart communication with his Lord, and not when they cry out to their Lord, making every one besides Him hear the cry.
	(395). [10.24] Our stopover here is to make a short engagement with our God, to test the truth of our involvement with the universal creation by His Leave and Guidance. We are to pass the rendezvous by the constancy of our hearty touch with the God in us, and if we stray away from His remembrance, we meet our doom, losing the earth, our station and office, from where we will rise to His promised Paradise. Nearer to the paradise in this life is earning the ‘Peace’ here, all our life.
	(396). [10.25] Allah guides him who remembers Him much.
	(397). [10.72] Those who wish for ‘peace,’ are the believers who put their trust in their God that they may be guided by humaneness. 
	(398). [10.74] Here Allah says He sends messengers in succession, to all nations, following every prophet. Allah sends an added portion of the Quran each time He chooses a prophet. They bring with them in addition to all that which Allah had sent to the earlier prophets. And the messengers closely follow the revelations of all their prophets. And Allah sends with each messenger His Signs as a proof for the people to know. There are people with insight who would follow the prophets and the Messengers, but there are the significant populations that would deny the Book and the revelations of it from Allah. Such are the people whose hearts Allah seals, and they will never see the right path nor will they heed the warnings. 
	(399). [10.87] Qibla - The Direction of Worship. Allah blesses the houses as shelters for the people wherein they rest, eat food, live in peace, with love and grace of life and solace to the heart. And by Allah’s leave, keep your homes pure only for Allah, and safeguard them against shaitans’ allurements; and, may the households fear Allah as they abide therein. They are the God-given sanctuaries for the believers wherefrom they set forth during rain and sunshine. And, wherever you are, direct your faces and thoughts towards the purity and safety of your houses. Keep your places aloft as the ‘Bait ul Haram - House of the Piety.’ And observe in it Allah’s command in abject subjugation in your Bait ul Haram to transform them each into the Masjid ul Haram - sanctified worshipping places. 
	(400). [10.92] People claim that the ‘mummy’ of Firaun has been found and kept in Egypt, rescued from the red sea from the time the Quran has come to us. However, it is immaterial from the Quran point of view. We know all about Firaun even to this day. And we witness many characters like ‘Firaun’ in the arena of the roguish and arrogant world leaders who bomb and blitz the nations, cities and towns, and every village; and, kill and silence the peace-loving innocent women, the young and the old, capturing and torturing them all before killing. Only God can save the world from them; at least, for Musa, there was a sea route to cross across to a safe land; but now only there is the sky route to mount upon for the ordinary people. Believe in Allah more and fear Him more. He might cleave the skies for us, and make the wisdom dawn upon us to excel every Firaun on this earth by God’s leave, the Most Exalted. That is the Sign of Firaun that Allah has preserved for us; the mummy of Firaun will not speak anything; but what Allah has revealed about Firaun proves to be accurate, that we witness the likes of Firaun in the leaders of every nation. Only the prayer of Musa and Harun which Allah accepted shall alone save us if we are faithful in our claim to be submitters to peace. And Musa said, “Our God, You have given to Firaun and his chieftains the embellishments and wealth of this world, and with that O our God, they make most of them stray away from Your path; our God, destroy their wealth and straiten their hearts; they will not believe until they suffer a chastising punishment.”
	(401). [11.1] 'Alif, Laam, Raa - These are the initials of the Wisdom of the Book - 
	'Alif' is the first letter of His Name, the 'Ahad,' i.e., the None but the One.' 
	'Laam' is the first letter of His Name, the 'Lathif,' i.e., the 'Gentle'. 
	'Raa' is the first letter of His Name, the 'Ru'ya' which means, the 'Insight'. 
	Therefore, all three initials put together, the meaning of  Alif, Laam, Raa is: There is no God but He, the One, the Most Gentle who imparts us the Insight. 
	(402). [11.40] Overflowing oven’ denotes such a period when the flourishing wealth and the great numbers of the disbelievers that made them overwhelmingly rejoice in their transgression and oppression (23.54,55,56) (9.25) (57.20).
	(403). [11.52] Refer to: (71.10, 11)
	(404). [11.59] Though Allah has mentioned Hud as their prophet, it is well concluded from the ayat above that Messengers sent for them nationwide for every tribe (14.4). All Prophets bring the Book with them to the Books the previous Prophets gave to the people, with pristine purity, untouched by the human hands. Its example is mentioned in (3.3, 48; 5.11). Thus, every nation belied their prophets and the Books they brought with them that were given to the previous prophets; and, plotted against all the Signs of Allah to strip them off, and kill their prophethood and reduce their prophets to mere human liars. Allah says that prophets are no other than humans as any of us except that He inspires wahi - the intuition. And hence they are Messengers.  But the disbelievers plotted against every prophethood in the first place (21.3; 23.24, 33, 38). And this is evident from the many ayats where Allah asks the disbelievers why they had killed the prophets before: (2.61,91; 3.21,112,181; 4.155). Going by the verses, it is to conclude that the disbelievers did not physically kill the prophets, but they belied the Books they brought to them from God. Allah saved every prophet from physical killing, the example of which is given in the narration of Prophet Isa (4.157). 
	(405). [11.120] Every messenger’s life in the path of Allah must be well understood to make our hearts firm in Allah, Today’s practice of reading the hadiths of a single prophet alone shall not suffice. Since the hadiths of every prophet and messenger are not available from human sources, follow them all in the Only Book, the Quran, as is inscribed in the above verse.
	(406). [12.1] A L R is the Signature of this chapter of the Book: ‘A’ denotes Allah, the God of the heavens and the earth and everything in between; ‘L’ indicates ‘Latif’ which means the Most Subtle, and ‘R’ represents ‘Ru’ya’ which means that which you envision. Therefore, the meaning of ALR is, “The Clear Vision you have as Insight is the Most Subtle Wisdom that Allah alone can create for you as your life’s fulfilment. And these are the Signs of the Book, clear.
	(407). [12.2] Allah declares He is the author of the Quran, and He sent it down originally in the Arabic language. And that, none shall dispute its originality in any other language.
	(408). [12.31] The wife of Aziz held a feast for the slandering women intending to expose their guilt; and, as guests they were, she beautifully received them all. (409).[12.31] Then, the lady asked her slave Yusuf to serve all her guests, the women. (410).[12.31] At the sight of Yusuf's handsomeness and elegance, the women lost their senses as their sinful nature overpowered them; they shamelessly advanced to him; but Yusuf, by Allah's mercy, preserved him. (411).[12.31] All their acts were watched by the lady who caught them red-handed and finally told them that he was the young boy whose charm attracted her.
	(412). [12.32] Now that all women together were guilty, they secretly counselled to plot against Yusuf, to make him fall to their desires.
	(413). [12.37] ‘The food’ indicates the end of their last feed in prison, and their free food to come to them’.
	(414). [12.40] From (12.38-40) is the essence of the Book given to the Prophet Yusuf, which he delivered to the prisoner companions, before the interpretation of their dreams is decreed; one of the two prisoners has accepted the Prophet’s message while the other differed. This admonition goes on in prison, for a term appointed for them; finally, the judgement Hour arrives for the two and Allah passes the decree on both through His Prophet, Yusuf. If only the other had not rejected the Prophet, His rule would have been different, and the explanation of his dream would have been beautiful. He would not have been crucified but freed for a prosperous life as one who would have fed the birds, rather than the birds feeding on him, for example. We have to follow the Prophet Yusuf by adhering to the three ayats (12.38-40) to get all beauteous things in our lives from our dreams and save ourselves from the disastrous consequences of the same. Before Allah passes His decree on our dreams, we shall take care not to differ with our Prophet Yusuf.
	(415). [12.93] Yusuf gave his shirt he wore when he was sold to Aziz of Misr as an innocent child, whose bodily fragrance his father could never forget. He asked his brothers to put it on his father's face to smell his presence; that will ascertain his father, that Yusuf, his dear son is alive and make his father lively from his gloom of grief with his sight now brightening. The shirt gains prominence here because it is one of Yusuf "s shirts upon which his brothers smeared false blood to make his father believe that a wolf ate Yusuf. And, his father knew he was not.
	(416). [12.96] Old age sight defects are due to worry, sadness, fear about a gloomy future, and persistent grief over the loss of what you had dotted. If one has old aged sight defects, God shall relieve him of his emotions to get his or her sight back.
	(417). [13.1] A L M R  are the Signs of the Clear Book; ‘A’ denotes Ahad in Arabic which means there is no God but the One who creates the heavens and the earth and everything in between. God is not a material felt by man’s five physical senses, but can only be felt in his conscience.  ‘L’ represents ‘Latif’ which means the Most Subtle. ‘M’ refers to ‘Mumin’ which means The Grantor of belief. And ‘R’ points to ‘Ru’ya’ - the vision we have as our Insight. Therefore the meaning of ALMR is: “The Clear Vision  that A Believer has as his Insight is the Most Subtle Wisdom, He, The One alone creates for you as your life’s establishment. And these are the Signs of the Book, clear.
	(418). [13.39] He is Allah, watchful of everything each one earns. And they are on a record, the Book of witness to each one’s deeds, the mother of all Books. It is the prescription of ordainment for a period, for his redemption and reward for his repentance and allegiance (5.39). Or a decree for his disobedience at the end of the prescribed term (29.21), specific for each individual. In (57.22), Allah says: Whatever occurs in the earth or you does not happen without a decree, determined before its occurrence. 
	(419). [14.1] Refer to (12.1)
	(420). [14.9] There had been many a Messenger and Prophet, and their people not mentioned in the Book. Allah informs that the news about those people should have come to you, directly from Allah, had you asked about them from Allah, without seeking to invent stories and wanton documentation of the lies as histories about them. Allah says none, but He has the truth about what you had designed and preserved as histories. If we are believers in the All-Knowing, All-Encompassing, let us turn to Him for the truth about the records enshrined in the Book. 
	(421). [14.25] The moment a child is born, copious milk starts pouring from the mother’s breasts instantly and then onwards, milk flow is nonstop for months and months to come to nourish the baby. We have to reminisce about this as we grow and shall show our gratitude to Allah that Allah will feed us without scarcity till the end of each of our lives. If we are grateful for this, then our goodly exchange of saying to each other is: Allah is the Truthful; Allah is the Provider; Allah is the Sustainer; Allah is the Giver of life; Allah is Most Pure in His Promises and that we shall believe in Allah in that He will feed us with pure food instantly and incessantly all our lives; the fruit-bearing power of its branches have already reached and branched out in the heavens. So, we would lead a heavenly life here and in the life to come. But when we forget Allah for His favours, we become our masters, and we strive to earn money for our livelihood which shall avail us not a drop of water, nor an atom of air, nor a grain of food from which not even an ounce of creative energy we receive from them all. Instead, the foods are sacks of poisons. The waters are bottles of venom, and the air in the atmosphere has already become full of diseases causing poisonous gases which produce virulent germs, bacteria and viruses. That is one example to remind us that we do not give thanks to Allah for His Benevolence.  
	(422). [14.44] The people destined to hell would say on the Day of Punishment that they would follow the “Messengers” instead of saying they would follow ‘Only Messenger, Muhammad’. But this is Allah’s command! Follow all The Messengers, now! Do not think they are dead; they are with us, along with the angels seeking forgiveness for us all the time. Follow every messenger mentioned in the Quran, and apply in your life as how they lived in the minutest details, and seek Allah’s help, submitting and surrendering to Him alone. For example, follow Ibrahim and Ayyub while you suffer diseases and distresses (6.42, 7.94)
	(423). [15.1] Refer to (12.1)
	(424). [15.9] “We” denote Allah and the chosen Messengers to whom He endows the wisdom, the Quran, of the Book. They are sufficient proof that the Revealer of the Quran of the Book is a Messenger from Him. And Allah chooses His Messengers from every population, in any period to reveal the Quran, a contextual guide and guard as promised by Allah.
	(425). [15.14] Every Sign of the Unseen, when revealed of the creations in Truth from space to earth, the tendency of the scientific population is to dismiss them as baseless. But, when their arguments fail before the Truth, in their attempt to deny and belie the Truth 10/39, they would say ‘we are bewitched’ by the illusionary discourse. 
	(426). [15.17] The Apollo moon exploration has been shelved for Allah protected it, from every shaitan, cursed. The Mars exploration is the next to fail and fall.
	(427). [15.18] Anyone hearing to the recitation to reject and falsify before a people who are not exposed to a blazing fire shall surround him.
	(428). [15.19] Refer to (41.10)
	(429). [15.20] Refer to  (41.10)
	(430). [15.21] Refer to  (41.10)
	(431). [15.29] Ruh is the Wisdom of Allah breathed into the Soul.
	(432). [15.36] Each one, human or jinn, has his Day of Reckoning. And before the reckoning arrives, Allah sends trial periods upon all, all-life, with the grants of His Mercy and Wisdom, elevating him in standards after which the trial ends. And he is delivered out of his ailments. Such Wisdom will save one from the future miseries in worldly life and put him on the straight path. But Shaitan says to Allah, he does not need the trials all his life, for he will not follow His directions, nor is he in need of His Mercy or Wisdom, but pleaded respite from him till his Last Hour.
	(433). [15.56] The Angelical Messengers descend on the earth for two reasons: one, before a person, bearing glad news for him, and two, to inform him about the destruction of a community. And when Ibrahim received the happy news from them, he then asked what next was their work.
	(434). [16.77] The secrets of the heavens and the earth: Every detail of all Allah has created, seen and unseen, their life and tenure, their purpose and existence - all are with Allah. And He reveals the truth of them all and subjects them to the will of whom He is pleased. None but Allah knows who of His servants are nearer to gaining the Throne, the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth. Allah reveals it to humanity, the descendants of Adam (2.31). Those who believe in Allah may they believe for this; the Hour may happen upon us as the most significant event from Him, at the blink of an eye, or the Hour maybe even nearer.
	(435). [16.81] Allah endows our minds of His Wisdom, Unseen, by which alone we find our practical    attainments and achievements by His guidance. We must be grateful to God, shed our boasting that we shall receive more and more of His Benevolence, the Wisdom.
	(436). [16.101] What Allah’s Sign or the Inspiration every verse of His Book reveals is ever a divine exposition at the instance of the predisposition of one’s mind. No Sign descends on you or earth, but it is a decree foregone before We make it a manifest sign (57.22).
	(437). [17.1] Masjid ul Haram’ is the holy place, ‘the Ruh or the Soul’, where the devout mind prostrates, worshiping the Wahi or the Inspiration of God, Almighty. The Ruh delivers to the sense of humans what is right or wrong in any matter it thinks or does, by the leave of God. And, as we listen to such inspiration, either we abide by it or ignore it to our benefit or loss. In our efforts, we expect our rewards, unsure of the outcome, and we see that as a faraway destination. By Allah’s leave, the travel to the goal of our premium is always near and dear. When Allah decides on a matter, all He has to say to it is, ‘Be! And it is!’ A believer in Allah believes in such Truth(the Qasm) from Allah. That point of Hour and Place during a period in our lives is reaching the Masjid ul Aqsa. And that travel occurs in the split of the winking of an eye. In the darkness of our blinking, the worlds of events and eventualities and consequences happen. 
	(438). [17.2] A scripture shall contain in it about God and humans, and that He is One and there is None But Him.
	(438). [17.3] Refer 11.48. Allah reveals that all those whom He carried with Nuh are not necessarily believers. While their ark settled on a land well-groomed for them, Allah admonishes Nuh that the disembarking people and their descendants will cause corruption in the world; yet. We will provide them sound sustenance until we seize them with a punishment severe.	
	(440). [17.5] Ungratefully to God, when a people transgress upon another nation, there is retaliation. But then the payback shall not exceed except to the extent the enemy transgressed; it is possible only for the God-fearing people who put their trust in Him and seek peace and patience; but, they are exceptional people. Those majority who are angered by the enemy aggression against them will settle scores only with their transgression in return, which Allah denounces (16.126). If the revenge outstrips the excesses committed by them, then Allah says the enemy will be allowed to settle scores, and the cold war shall be on until both the enemies are wiped out.
	(441). [17.45] Refer 7.179, 198;  18.57;  22.46
	(442). [17.48] 7.193;  17.45;  18.57;  22.46;  35.14  And so you will give glad tidings from the Quran only to those about whom you are sure they are not astray  50.45;  51.55. And in our daily life it is important that we shall not make fun of or strike evil similes for others 39.48.
	(443). [17.53] It is Allah who causes liveliness that binds the hearts of the believers, and that He shall bring us all together; so respond to the call of Allah and let us always say nicest things possible when we speak 8.24
	 (444) .[17.54] Ref: 25.56
	(445). [17.75] This is the kind of punishment Allah has given to Firaun and his leaders - the double punishment while living in this world is: one, from our own association to Allah, we take to the evil path; and the other, from the likes of us whom we have taken for friends, who would conduct us further into the evil. And the double punishment at death is: while at death, the malayikas - the angels smite our faces and backs 8/50, the torment will be severe and it will  be doubled - they will be brought before the fire for punishment, morning and evening 40/46 that shall continue till the day of Resurrection.
	(446). [17.77] Wherever Allah sends the messengers, the practise of the disbelieving leaders of the community has been the same that they should either imprison them; or kill them; or drive them away 8/30 from their lands. And similarly there is no change in the way of Allah, that they will be dealt with severely while living and while at death with double the torment 17/75.
	(447). [17.78] Fajr - It is the time when we wake up; Allah says it is the time for the awakening of one’s mind to the Wisdom of Quran, through the constant reflection of the Verses, or the Signs of Quran.  
	(448). [17.104] Promise of the Hour mentioned here is the second promise of Allah about the final doom on Israel 17.7
	(449). [17.110]Here Allah says apart from whatever Names ye say of Him, there are more, and more Beautiful Attributes for Him in the heavens and in the earth 7/180; 30/27; 56/78; 59/24. And some such Attributes are: the One without ascendants nor descendants; and the One without Helpers nor Associates; the One without weaknesses. Always try calling His Names as a detailed Attribute like conferring a title with reasons; and do not merely rattle out Names using single words. 
	(450). [18.17] “It” here does not indicate the shadow of the sun for the shade moves to the west and to the east; and, not to the right and to the left. ‘It’ inclines away towards the ‘right’ from their cave: The cave gains importance because of the dwellers in it; they are the centre point here from whom the righteous power submissively inclines away from all around it, by the leave of Allah. Here, as the sun rises and the morning begins, Allah takes up the rein of affairs for the dwellers of the cave, in the right direction; and as the sun sets the evil omen is driven far away to the left of the cave. From the Quran we do understand the right means the blessings of Allah and the left means the influences of shaitan; in Allah’s reckoning, the people of the dwellers of the cave should take a period of 9 added to 300 years of patient reciting and teaching of Allah’s Signs for them to understand what the belief in Almighty Allah should provide them.
	(451). [18.23] Here the most sorrowful thing happens to the mankind in their affairs and daily businesses when they make signed documents and agreements which bears witnesses such as: “I will do or I will complete this and that in the stipulated time!” This is the reason for the disastrous end to the most of the dealings for we err against the command and order of Our God. But if you have no other go other than committing to this way, then remember Allah more for He would guide to the best and the easiest Way. 
	(452). [18.25]Again guess not if it is 9 hours, or 9 days, or 9 weeks, or 9 months or 9 years; Or nine times three hundred years. Allah knows and we know not. This number is given as only a test unto us to make us know what we do with this; whether we enter into dispute regarding them or resign altogether from it?
	(453). [18.31] ‘Sunthus and Isthabrak’ are the golden green silky fabrics Allah mentions as clothing for the honoured inhabitants of the gardens of paradises.
	(454). [18.60] The meeting point of the two seas are the point where the sea our knowledge reaches a dead end and from where the sea of God’s Wisdom is to open up; then what you shall witness is miracle after miracle happening all through. They even forgot to eat their morning food while they were resting there. Let us see what happens here:-
	(455). [18.61]This is the miracle that happens right before their eyes which they both saw; but they forgot as if it were all but an usual event, for their insight and their wisdom at that meeting point was so bright, way away from the nomadic knowledge of mundane human beings; they both did not feel their appetite and fatigue too as long as they were sitting by the shore. One important thing is that they failed to notice there was, by them a servant of God, endowed with wisdom, who too was watching them both and all the events happening before them. The man finds them to be in a haste and he knew that they were missing what they were looking for and that all they needed was patience 	
	(456). [18.65] They greet each other and come to know of one another; since Musa had journeyed and had come a long way from his home, he was given a short stay with the gentleman and Musa learnt certain of the righteous path, God had taught him. And the parting time came between them. By then, the servant of God, the gentleman was fully aware of Musa’s lack of patience.
	(457). [18.68] The God’s servant was ill at ease with Musa, since he has so many things to do by the will of God in the days to come which Musa cannot bear to think of even, let alone watching him do things he is commanded to do. He thought Musa could be a great obstacle in his cause. Yet, Musa persisted in the Name of Allah.
	(458). [18.70] So Musa remains with him and when Allah’s command comes the servant of God, set out with Musa to destination.
	(459). [18.77] At this Allah’s leave comes to the servant of God to part ways with Musa, and before leaving he shall say to Musa, ‘of the events about which he could not endure with you, as you endured up to this point’. Only at this point, even the God’s servant himself is revealed of the reasons behind his actions. So he begins speaking to Musa of the parting between them.
	(460). [18.86] When Zulqarnain was travelling he reached a people living by the muddy waters at which time the sun also has set and the light disappeared and the darkness has shrouded the way; so, he was to stay with the people about there. They were a very downtrodden people having no means of light for them. Abiding by God’s command he decided to show them the light of wisdom, for he found the people to be men of learning if they are shown the Signs of God and then the way. He set things right for them, cleared their way for a beautiful living, while he was living with them for a short period. Then he laid down his ruling upon them thus:
	(461). [18.91] Zulqarnain showed them the way to protect them from the sun by the leave of Allah and placed them on the straight path, before he left; though he had much more of the knowledge, to give them maximum comfort, he showed not all the Signs of Allah for they were not a people proper for those Signs.
	(462). [19.1] K - Karim, The Most Dignified; H - Hudha, The Guide; Y - Yahya, The Grantor of Life; A - Alim, The All-Knowing; S - Siddiq, The Truthful. Thus the combined meaning of the above Initials of Allah is:  O The Most Dignified, but for Your Guidance, our lives are not Guaranteed nor Granted; O The All-Knowing, teach us the True Path unto You.
	(463). [19.6] When Zachariah supplicated his wish to his God, he had such peaceful faith which was immediately accepted by God; but only later on the acceptance of his wish is revealed to Zachariah as a test to him. But at that time Zachariah was not as faithful as he was when he supplicated his wish to God.
 	(464). [19.15] Those who lived and died to the pleasure of Allah, shall not be seen as dead, but perceive his presence with Allah as ever. So Yahya, ‘May peace be upon him’, is alive with us even now; and before and after. “O Allah, teach us about Yahya and make us feel ‘his presence and peace’ in our lives, if Thee wish it.”
	(465). [19.16] The East is a symbol of a horizon, where the dawning of a new world, drew Maryam close; and she drew close to it, withdrawing from the ways of her family. A new world order is to be born with her journey, this.
	(466). [19.35] Into the lungs of every individual Allah inspires His intention and decrees it to be as one’s own life-will and pleasure, when he breathes in His message. And such Will, breathed into the bosom of each one discreetly, functions as his life-generating force; it is a force of interest to live and enjoy the beauty in that “Be!”. When we inhale our each inspiration as good news to us, from Allah, we shall extract it into our invisible mind and house it there; and never shall we dare create it manifestly through our imaginations that which are not really God intended life for us. They are vain imaginations because, none has the knowledge or power to unfold what God has intended for each of us. He is not a copier of His own creation but creates anew; and each soul with its God send messages in it, the originating, all-encompassing power. Newer and newer manifestations, never present before are being originated for the purpose of our creation or against us when we are totally careless about the Origination by God through His Messages inspired into our souls. From such generative power of messages in each soul, the physical manifestations of them all are in the process of making already, by God’s command from the powers of the entire universal realm and from the powers over and above the seven heavens.
	(467). [19.39] Those who are believers and God-fearing will be made to ascend the throne of their affairs.
	(468). [19.40] Allah will inherit the skies and the earth for those who are God fearing and believing.
	(469). [19.41] The Prophet deserves special mention for most of us are not following God truthfully nor obeying God honestly. Most of us are not God-fearing but fear the men and the matters more. We have taken to lies as the foundation to live on the earth 2/10.
	(470). [19.52] Refer 2/63, 64 and 93
	(471). [19.59] We shall be ascertained today that after the death of each and every prophet and every messenger, their descendants ruined what the prophets brought with them and what the messengers abided by, by bringing their offices under their control. And they were and are the Kings of States even now. 
	(472). [19.69] Woe to those believers who became sectarians, deviating from the One Straight Path 6/159; 23/52, 53. Such insolent ones - all of them will be separated from those who call themselves as muslims, as christians,  as jews and as sabians 2/62.
	(473). [19.70] The leaders of every sect will be made to lead their sects into burning hell.
	(474). [19.71] Ref: 19/57 The position of the God fearing is that they will be raised to a high position that they would not go down into the hell along with the hell bound.
	(475). [19.87] Even the great prophet Nuh was denied authority to intercede for his own son when he was drowned in the sea of floods 11/46,47. And from what we understand from Allah, we are not to take some prophets over other prophets in closeness to Allah; and upon this ground too we are exhorted that we shall not find any change in the way of Allah 33/62; 35/43.
	(476). [19.88]Such sayings of them would have caused the heavens to blast, the earth to rend and the mountains shattered to dust 19/90; but for the angels who were prompted to seek forgiveness for the people in the world 42/5. Any time the disaster shall befall the communities altogether, all around the world in turns for a specified period before the doom descends on the entire world - upon the heavens and the earth and everything in between.
	(477). [19.90] Refer 19/88; 42/5
	(478). [20.1] Tha - Thahir, The Most Pure; Ha - Hudha, The Righteous path. Thus the combined meaning of ‘Tha Ha’ is: This is the Most Pure for the Righteous. 
	(479). [20.9] Hadith - it denotes the truthful events and narrations from Allah of the past, present and the future. 
	(480). [20.10] Allah only shows Musa His Light, to draw him alone near to Him.
	(481). [20.42] If we are not to fear any situation, however, inimical it is to us - then remember the Attributes of Allah, attributing them all, in every detail reminiscing all our past deliverances from every evil we earned by His Grace. And let us not grow tired of it, ever.
	(482). [20.80] Thur - Refer chapter 2.63 
	@ Mannu-Salwa - Refer chapter 2.57
	(483). [20.81] @ The mischievous are the politicians! 
    	Foods never to be sold shall be the future POLITIC against the present anti-God, cunning despicable politics....
     	Food is the energy source for the mind and body; the bulk quantity of the food is for the body but the taste quality of the food alone is for the satisfaction of the mind. Only when the mind is fully satisfied it shall be at peace; but when the quality of mind is compromised for money, then the trouble starts with the mind. Later on, the mental deficiency caused by the qualitatively low-grade food results in the bodily diseases and afflictions.
    	Grading the food according to the quality should be done only to distribute free of cost, the best quality, and top grade food to the people and discard the rest. But unfortunately, what happens in the poor third world countries is to pick and collect the lowest grade food for distribution to its own people. It amounts to that leader of the country, disgraces the souls and degrades the status of every one of the citizens. All these happen because money and price are valued above the lives of the people. The foods shall never be sold for whatever reason, if every citizen of every country should be worthy of looking up to, for the righteous way towards very prosperous heights by all world around. Such will be the status of every individual if only he is allowed his best foods and vegetables and fishes and fruits available on their soil and in their sea, and in the air, amply provided by God, the only Provider, The Most Abundant. Such Provision by the Creator, God enriches the minds of the people towards inhabiting greater knowledge, fruitful inventions and individualised developments elevating the ranks of the people to a new world for the future well-mannered world of tomorrow, as against today's very badly manoeuvred evil-minded politicians of the world.
	(484). [20.100] Our lives are laden with the heaviness in the heart with the stresses and strain with regard to the past, the present, and the future. The past was barren, the present is windswept, and the future remains deserted. It is time now to turn to God in absolute submission and shall have to find solace in our hearts in Him and Him alone. It is possible when we submit to God saying, “O God, bar us from the knowledge and the ways of the people at large, and take me wholesomely into your wisdom.” 
	(485). [20.114] The completion of Quran’s revelation in one’s heart is the attainment of wisdom from Allah, a sure gain above all knowledge of jinn and mankind. He is the Most High and His stern warning to us all is do not try to explain or preach Quran before it is revealed to you and completed in full by way of Inspiration from Allah. We know that the ayats of Quran are completed in us when we begin to feel that our nature had changed to righteousness in line with of Quran. Thus, Allah completes the truth of every ayat of Quran by making it our nature and make us live by it. Only at this hour, and from this hour, we are allowed to speak on Quran from our nature. Before the Quran ayats became our nature and we live by it, we are not allowed to explain Quran. For it is hateful in the eyes of Allah to say what we do not do 61/2,3. Allah surely made this covenant with Adam before, but he forgot and had guided people while he is yet to be steadied and made firm in his commitment to stand by the tenets of Quran.
	(486). [20.115] Adam denotes the mankind who is empowered by Allah, the Most Beneficent and the Most Merciful upon the skies and the earth and everything in between, through His Wisdom. And Adam among the mankind who abides by his God’s Will in all firmness will ever be Allah’s representative upon the heavens and the earth, whose abundance was the model of a perfect paradise; and this was the state of the earth at the time of creation and choosing Adam of the mankind. And Allah commanded the inhabitants of the skies to obey and descend upon the man with their treasures, in right measures when he wishes a thing by His Name.
	(487). [20.116] Adam is the one who is a steadfast slave of Allah; they are among the pairs, the men and among the women; and by disobeying Allah’s command, he shall surely become enemies to the people of Adam, to men and to women. And among the pairs of them, he should cause disparity and enmity. So Allah warns us of this enemy, Iblis. O Adam, men, and women! if you show any inequity and disparity amongst you, then you shall suffer the disobeying of the heavens and earth to your will and wish. You shall descend then, from the paradise to your own distress.
	(488). [20.119] While the life in the paradise was so wonderful and a never ending bliss to them by the moment that anyone would love to live in it eternally; but the mankind knows about its well defined and limited life-span. Here, the Iblis, shaitan intended to cause in them the desire for long, long life - eternal. Thus were the men and the women of the Adam community, whispered of it. And they began to differ in the order of Allah.
	(489). [20.120] So they lost them and fell for the evil, induced by shaitan and began to have the taste of them all; now all the evil they have consumed with their evil mentality has to be eliminated through an elimination process; thus, the excretory organs began to become active to eliminate the evil consumed into it. The obnoxious smell of them brought out to them, their shame.
	(490). [20.123] Allah does not mention in Quran, Adam and his wife to descend first and then do all people; but He says to the entire mankind to lose their status as inmates of paradise 2/38; so the paradise like earth - its splendour, richness, and vastness is reduced to a level enough for man to survive on it; and if he is reasonable and noble when guidance from Allah comes to him, he will regain the status from where he is made to descend.
	(491). [20.126] Whoever turns a blind eye to the shining signs of Allah when they come to him through His chosen messengers to every society of the population, on the day of resurrection he will be raised in utter darkness.
	(492). [20.133] The proof of God’s words comes to every people of every tribe through the chosen messengers from among their own folks; only when they reject the proofs brought by their messengers, the torment and straitness for them begins - after a determined period of trial in which they will begin to taste of the luxuries and the pleasures of this world. 
	(493). [21.2] Hadiths are the truthful news from Allah that has in it the admonition, the glad tiding, the warning, the wisdom, the inspiration, the revelation of the creation, the living, the hereafter, the eternal existence and the lasting journey of a human soul and the Signs of them all in each of His Verses of Quran.
	(494). [21.44] Hadiths are the truthful news from Allah that has in it the admonition, the glad tiding, the warning, the wisdom, the inspiration, the revelation of the creation, the living, the hereafter, the eternal existence and the lasting journey of a human soul and the Signs of them all in each of His Verses of Quran.They were made to taste the luxuries and the pleasures of the world all their lives until Allah seized them of a sudden 26/57; 44/25; 7/78, 91 and then their wealth avail them naught and they lay prostrated in their houses. And those who were in luxurious life today shall have to fear their God, that their provisions from their land are being destroyed slowly,  or their provisions are removed from them either by way of their own restriction of food or their lands become barren yielding no fruits 34/16.  
	(495). [21.45] Surely Allah veils their eyes from observing, places lids and closes their hearts from perceiving and causes deafness in their ears so that they will be removed far away astray 6/25; 41/5,44; 71/7
	(496). [21.48] ‘The Distinguishment’ or ‘The Furqan’ is the Wisdom bestowed upon each one’s Soul by which one will be able to judge between the righteousness and the evil. The Furqan is the Book or the Light of Guidance to the Straight Path. And the pages of Furqan would open up for those who are reminiscent, and God fearing.
	(497). [21.58] ‘The Distinguishment’ or ‘The Furqan’ is the Wisdom bestowed upon each one’s Soul by which one will be able to judge between the righteousness and the evil. The Furqan is the Book or the Light of Guidance to the Straight Path. And the pages of Furqan would open up for those who are reminiscent, and God fearing. Ibrahim did not break the idols in hatred against his folks or the deities they were worshiping, but to make them think how the mighty deity did not protect the small idols and allowed such things to happen before its presence.
	(498). [21.63] Then and there their ‘Distinction - the Furqan’, opened up their good sense for them.
	(499). [21.68] Every time the leaders of disbelievers and those who set up partners to Allah kindled the fire of destruction, against the believers, Allah puts them out 5/64. This is what has happened in the case of Ibrahim when the disbelieving leaders of his community kindled the fire against him. Allah cooled down the hearts of his people because the incident of breaking up of the smaller idols awakened their Distinction - the Furqan. So despite their leaders’ provocations, they could not do any evil to Ibrahim. And Allah further cooled down the hearts of the people in favour of Ibrahim; thus, the disbelieving leaders had to resort to secret plot against him.
	(500). [21.70] Then Allah sheltered Ibrahim and those who believed with him upon the land blessed for the people of all the worlds. And more, the prophet Lut joined with Ibrahim by Allah’s design. 
	(501). [21.78] When Dawood and Sulaiman deeply considering the dispute, Allah has ever been a party with them as a Witness; but before they delivered their decision, Allah clarifies the matter to them and simplifies the issue.  
	(502). [21.79] The Truth is the knowledge of the Unseen, and the Wisdom is the Truth of the manifest and non manifest things. And though the birds were subjected to Dawood, Sulaiman was also commanding the birds after Dawood. This shows when Allah bestows the Truth and the Wisdom of certain things to certain of his bondsmen - and if He wills to subject the same to the other of His bondsmen too, by His Leave, He shall.
	(503). [21.96] The Truth is the knowledge of the Unseen, and the Wisdom is the Truth of the manifest and non manifest things. And though the birds were subjected to Dawood, Sulaiman was also commanding the birds after Dawood. This shows when Allah bestows the Truth and the Wisdom of certain things to certain of his bondsmen - and if He wills to subject the same to the other of His bondsmen too, by His Leave, He shall. Yajuj and Majuj are none other than those who wax pride, wickedness and transgression.
	(504). [21.104] The sky has in it all time records and proofs of all man’s deeds 45/22; 51/22.
	(505). [22.17] The sky has in it all time records and proofs of all man’s deeds 45/22; 51/22. Refer 2/62. Whether you call yourselves as belonging to any religion or group or sect you and your fathers have associated with Allah will not judge us by that but by what they practised in obedience to the Signs of Allah.
	(506). [22.27] Hajj means the Wish of Allah in each one’s mind as His command, which becomes an ardent necessity all his life. For example each one wants: a comfortable life free from straitness; poverty free life; disease free life; ease and peace; no enmity; no distress; beautiful nature all around and no disasters ever to touch it; life of beauty and splendour; a paradisiacal habitation as a wholesome Wish for one’s entire life. To find the way towards this Hajj, the Wishful life, people will come to you from all around while they are in their poverty, adversity, distress and despair.
	(507). [22.32] Hajj means the Wish of Allah in each one’s mind as His command, which becomes an ardent necessity all his life. For example each one wants: a comfortable life free from straitness; poverty free life; disease free life; ease and peace; no enmity; no distress; beautiful nature all around and no disasters ever to touch it; life of beauty and splendour; a paradisiacal habitation as a wholesome Wish for one’s entire life. To find the way towards this Hajj, the Wishful life, people will come to you from all around while they are in their poverty, adversity, distress and despair.Conscience is one’s eternal abode; abiding by the conscience is standing witness to the Signs of Allah; and, whoever guards himself against being snatched or blown away from his conscience are rewarded with Allah’s Signs; thus he stands witness to the truthful words of promises by Allah. Of the Signs of Allah, when becomes manifest, thereof are the benefits for the people of his community for a stated term. If the society wants endless benefits of the Signs of Allah, Allah wants them to return to their individual sacrifices standing by their conscience, The Eternal Abode.
	(508). [22.36] The sacrifices that we do does not reach Allah but the sacrifices we make of us reach Allah.
	(509). [22.59] The sacrifices that we do does not reach Allah but the sacrifices we make of us reach Allah. Surely whoever desert their homes in the cause of Allah, they surely please Allah, and, He is pleased with them. Theirs is the welcoming gates of heavens.
	(510). [22.60] We come to know from this ‘ayat’ the importance of being patient in the first instance without retaliating to a wrong committed upon us by anyone but turn to Allah for Help. All this, only to earn the pleasure of Allah so that He welcomes us to the open gates of heavens. Allah surely Sees and Hears to the call of such callers.
	(511). [22.61] Allah causes the darkness in us to recede as He makes us enter His Light; and, causes the arrogant to get into the 		darkness of their lives.
	(512). [24.2] There are two directives to the punishment: 1. Whip both the guilty with a hundred lashes and 2. There shall have to be a group of believing witnesses. And the believing witnesses must fulfil the ten criterions listed in chapter 23: 1-10. Such believing witnesses shall have to be of two groups of considerable numbers of the women and the men to stand witnesses separately. And these witnesses must bring four witnesses each, failing which each witness shall be punished with 80 stripes 24/4. None shall have the audacity to stand there as the witness when each soul has with it the sin they had earned 24/11. 
	(513). [24.3] An adulterer or an adulteress is one who has the habit of setting up multiple partners each. An adulterer can  only marry a woman who shall set up partners other than him; and, similarly, an adulteress can only marry a man who shall set up partners other than her. Such setting up of partners other than the lawful ones to each other is forbidden to the believers in Allah and the Last Day.
	(514). [24.4] In almost every household most men charge their women with such evil-words whenever there are heated exchanges, in fit of anger; but then they had no evidences which makes them guilty for eighty lashes - henceforth their testimony never stands ever. God knows who sought forgiveness for their evil behaviour and became righteous; thus it is not for the people to judge who a believer is and who is not. So it is impossible to gather a group of believers to stand witness to the punishment; and such punishment stands cancelled forever. Everyone who shall stand there as witness is a gang among them who came out with such charges against women 24/11. 
	(515). [24.8] There is a hundred percent possibility, that any one would deny by Allah, the charges of such grimness to save her from the morbid air. So again, such charges against women shall, by Allah, never take effect ever. 
	(516). [24.9] Allah expresses His wrath upon the men who comes up with slanders on women in all the above ayats; and warns the men and women alike, if only Allah’s forgiveness and grace has not been upon us;- He would have wiped us from the earth’s surface long ago.
	(517). [24.10] If we are believers and of those who praise His Wisdom, who knows best which one of us is pardoned of our own ‘evil-arrogance’, and then is reformed and enlightened? But for His Mercy and Grace we would have beed perished even as we are indulging in such harassing behaviour. 
	(518). [24.11] Ref:24/2
	(519). [24.35] The Light of Allah - The Light guides the heavens and the earth and all that Allah has created in between by His command to shed the Light upon the hearts of those who are guided by reflection. The Light is like a lamp in a niche, well protected, needless of any fire of the east or the west, to kindle it, for it has its own brilliance. The Light of guidance is in the ‘niche’ or in the ‘Ruh’ of man’s heart; and, the ‘Ruh’ is in the mind; it is like a radiant star. Though the mind is not kindled by the fiery worldly turmoil, its brilliance of tranquillity reflects from its own. This Allah’s guidance upon the guidance. Allah guides those of the mankind who reflect and mind.   
	(520). [25.1] The distinguishing ability is the greatest of all the treasures seen or unseen sent down as Furqaan by the Blessed, to the discerning mind; and each of those who reflects and comprehends his unique presence amidst the environments is The Servant of God, for he uses the Furqaan, the treasure he has in possession from the most Blessed, in just manner.
	(521). [25.2] So we are not to follow any other than our own self, for each one of us is created uniquely according to a measure, to 		have a say over His kingdom that which God only knows.
	(522). [25.20] Entire human nation is divided on each one’s points of view with his compounding views on points of every one on anything and everything; for example, when a person has a disease, each doctor will have a diagnosis of his own, and the methodology of each one’s management of the disease will be different to that of the other and one will vie with another. This is the situation widely prevalent amongst people; none has the truthful knowledge but mere concoction of theories and developing lies upon which the doctors heavily believe and force the ignorant patients to put their trust on them only to betray them in the end. Allah’s guidance is that, that in the Name of the All-Knowing, All-Powerful to be patient and seek guidance from Him, the Almighty. Those who observe patience, surely Allah guides them all in righteousness.
	(523). [25.21] What is hidden to our physical senses are to be sensed only by the intuition from the Signs of Allah; this is The Law 		or The Taurat i.e, the part of Quran given to Musa. When Musa said to His God, “O my God, I should see you; show You to me”, God said, 		“O Musa, you will never see Me; yet, see this mountain; if it stays firm in its place, then you shall see Me.” So when his God sent down 		His might upon that mountain, it was shattered to dust. Musa fainted; when he came around, his inspiration got the better of him 		through the God performed Sign and said, “Glory be to you; I seek Your forgiveness; I am of those who believed, firsthand 7/143.” In the 		same way all those that are set in our hearts through inspirations, are to be sensed through His Signs alone and should be gathered 		firsthand from God and never to be conceived as theories and ideas of practical manifestations; and if anyone who persists in such 		exercises, they are doomed, even if they are strong as a mountain. They will stay “absolutely forbidden” all their lives to all the good 		news. And We will destroy all their works and will be reduced to dust, scattered.
	(524). [25.32] While reading the Quran we are to read it a little at a time to reflect the verse within our hearts to understand and get at the guidance therefrom with reference to the live situation within and outside of us. The guidance we get from the verse is for our better living with increased faith in Allah, is the Revelation of Quran, by the grant of Allah. Thus every individual will be revealed of the Guidance from Quran depending upon the situation each has placed himself in, - this in fact is the Revelation sent down upon the Reader to strengthen his heart in faith. This is a day of Ramadhan in the life of an individual. And it is  necessary that he has to fast on that specific day. Like wise, each one will be fasting on those days when the Revelation is sent down upon his heart, counting and completing 30 days in 365 days, comprising of a month of fasting in each year. Refer: 2/185.
	(525). [25.37] Ref: 17/3. Presently the people of Nuh are those who belied the Signs of Allah and they who mocked at their messengers, despising them; all such were drowned or were marooned. Even now there are the towns and the cities drowned by the sea, by the rain and by the hurricanes; all of them who were ruined were the likes of the people of Nuh and such will ever live on the earth to show the world that we shall not see any change in the Words of Allah, forever to come.
	(526). [25.58] While we claim to be our God’s servants, then we fear Him for He knows all the evils we hide in us contrary to what we show us as to the outside world. We camouflage us as all roses while we are henbane inside our bosoms. So we aught to put our trust in Him, the Pure, the Exalted. He has power over the produces of all our - the bondsmen’s sins. Fear Him; we are to be purified of our sinful hearts and to be elevated in ranks by the Exalted.
	(527). [26.1] ‘Tha’ - Thahir, The Pure; ‘Seen’ - Subhaan, The Most Pure; ‘Meem’ - Mumin, The Believing; ‘Meem’ - ‘Muttaqun' - The God fearing. So the combined meaning of the four letters is: God fearing are they who believe and who preserve purity at heart. 
	(528). [26.7] Everything on the earth is created to pair with the will of man, by the leave of Allah, the Most Benevolent, Most Merciful.
	(529). [26.51] The ‘first-hand believers’ are they who are directly guided by Allah through His authoritative Signs.
	(530). [26.58] It is pertinent to remember be reminded of here, that we certainly are to seek protection from God that our mission must be righteous whenever we set out of our houses and dwelling places, to return back to it safely by His leave.
	(531). [26.151] Politicians in every piece of land in the world are the exemplars to this truth.
	(532). [27.1]  ‘Tha’ - Thahir, meaning the Pure; ‘Seen’ - Subhan, meaning the most Pure. Thus the combined meaning of the two letters Tha Seen is: Purified by the Most Pure.
	(533). [27.29] Queen of Saba was a righteous and a virtuous woman, having no greediness, neither enmity nor jealousy against any other nation; and she respected neighbouring people for she considered that every nation possesses honourable and precious people in it, as a grace from God Himself; and that she was submissive to godliness and godly qualities of people.  
	(534). [27.32] The queen of Saba, though she has full authority over her mighty forces, her command to them always had been humble and decided all the national affairs only after due consultations with them; this verse describes the last of her instances. The forces gave the Queen the mantle of decision.
	(535). [27.33] And in every affair, her hosts of  unsurpassable resources that comprised her grand assembly, valued their Queen’s sagacity high and far above them. She was placed on the throne for the great regard and concern she had for her people and the foresight she had for her nation’s grandeur. She respected the noble men and women of her country; and high in her agenda was the safety to them all; she deemed the people of nobility and wisdom as the riches and enrichment who shall raise the country to lofty heights. What a Queen she was who gave foremost importance to safeguard the respect, the regard, and the honour of her people, unlike the politicians of the present times who to the contrary disrespect, disregard and demean their own people in the name of democracy, looting and plundering the nations’ all resources.
	(536). [27.34] The Queen of Saba opted for peace rather than preferring war though she had at her command and disposal a formidable force of a mighty power. Allah had indeed endowed her with wisdom and humility and her heart was willing to bow to righteousness.
	(537). [27.41] Instead of duplicating and disguising her throne, Sulaiman could have created a throne for more superior to her throne; but Sulaiman did not do it because he wanted to admonish her not to be proud on account of her magnificent throne and that the people should never adore her except God; and had she been humble and submissive only to Allah and thus were she a muslim, she could have been blessed by Allah, with a wisdom more beautiful than what she has been possessing.
	(538). [27.43] Sulaiman now commands a deeply reflecting, glassy palace to be built in a flash; Sulaiman’s vision and reach is faster and quicker than the wink of eyes; so when she blinked she could see an astounding magnificence standing before her, a palace of stunning beauty. Sulaiman said to her, “Enter in it!” Then she saw the floor like a pure pool. She was utterly devastated as she slumped down from her pride and glory.
	(539). [27.48] Every nation of the world is thus corrupted by the unrighteous men governing the land by kakistocracy. They will plan and plot against their own people in order to stick to the power so that they can plunder the land and squander its people of their properties at will; and they enact laws after laws in their assemblies to legalise state sponsored terrorism against the common man that they shall not raise even a whiff of a voice against the misruling party. They will not hesitate to eliminate families by night or by day through secret agencies.   
	(540). [27.50] Allah is with those who remember Him, seeking His Mercy more and more; and, as a result, when their hearts attain peace and tranquillity, the tide changes by the leave of Almighty against the mischievous chiefs and chieftains catastrophically casting doom on the entire population.
	(541). [27.51] The dwelling places of the people all over the world, upon whichever lands the doom was cast by Allah, are those places on earth, which were misruled by the most arrogant government; and because the people fell prostrated before the wrongful chiefs and ministers and submitted to their wicked laws, they are the first to be ruined and their houses are the first to be destroyed. Because these downtrodden people are the ones who authorised the wicked and unjust to rule over them; and upon such of these is the wrath of Allah (43/54, 55).
	(542). [27.82] Today the Word has come to pass; we find worldwide, the disasters of catastrophic proportions sweeping across, and criss crossing the lands infested with people; the word of promise befall them repeatedly and grave afflictions follow suit closely, one following the other. Finally, for those who say ‘We believe!’ but the belief had never entered their hearts; and for those who do not believe in the Signs of Allah but believed with soulful faith in the medical science and the doctors and specialists, all the while keeping them on par with or valuing them above Allah, we now stand witness to the Promise of Allah that has come to pass. The man eating wild beasts from the forests are soon to roam free on the streets and enter the houses of man to feed upon them; and out of the earth is brought forth various creatures: the bed bugs, the mosquitoes, the snakes, the killer viruses - the cancer viruses, the swine virus, the bird virus, the plague virus, the HIV virus, the zika virus and so on. Not one of these can be done away with for they have come to stay and are to swarm the mankind speaking to them they were never believers and henceforth they are to suffer disasters after disasters, afflictions after afflictions, until there shall be groans and death, and shall last till the world ends as only a curse upon them…
	(543). [28.1] Tha - Thahir meaning The Pure; Seen - Subhan meaning The Most Pure; Meem - Mumin meaning The Believer. So the combined meaning of the Three Letters is - The Believers will be Purified by The Most Pure.
	(544). [28.3] Firaun’s history will repeat all through as long as the world exists even as the likes of him existed before, from the time of Adam 8/52, 54.
	(545). [28.5] What we are to know here is: the more we feel abased and belittled by the majority population, if only we remain patient and peaceful in the Name of Allah, the Beneficent and Merciful, He will make us inherit the land, and establish us therein to abide forever. This is the message to any people oppressed in their land in all the worlds 69/43, 81/27; and it is the history of the past and the present; and Allah’s words are never to change in the future too; this is a glad tiding to the people of all the worlds from Allah, the God of all worlds.
	(546). [28.7] Allah’s inspiration ever reaches each of us, in our breathing, during every inspiration phase of our respiration; if only we are careful not to be neglectful of any glad tiding and good feel sent down upon our hearts about tomorrow, then anxiety and fear are removed and peace is settled in our hearts with regard to the adverse events, known and unknown to us even as they are dispersed away for good by the Almighty. So also Allah has inspired to Musa’s mother, ‘not to fear nor grieve’, and absolute tranquillity descended in her heart, when she obeyed Allah and left the infant Musa, in the river.
	(547). [28.27] This has been the ‘mahr’ - or the dowry, or the marriage money Musa has to offer to wed one of his daughters.
	(548). [28.30] The ‘Tree is a Sign’ of what Allah produces for the liveliness of all mankind on earth, which  Adam touched and grabbed it for himself when Iblis allured him to it. The trees are blessed ones, and the land and the entire surrounding upon which the trees stand is blessed by Allah, until when man with greed enters into it and touches the tree, wrongfully. From such blessed and untouched tree, a voice arouses Musa’s conscience.  “Indeed I am Allah Who has blessed the place where you stand; and you are secured by my Light and Wisdom!” 
	(549). [28.48] After Musa, messengers were continuously sent to them 28/45 each one with the Signs from Allah. And the leaders of the evil society only involved in vain arguments  to reject them each and every Sign Allah sent with them.	
	(550). [28.52] Every scripture to every people, from the inception of man in this world, comes only after the subject and substance of the scripture to be sent down upon a chosen Prophet, made commonly accepted by all before, by word of mouth, and by their signs and the truth, through His Messengers. There are people who mind it and abide by it in their moral life, already tasting the rewards from Almighty God, before even He sends the Scripture down, in one of the human languages. And when finally the scripture with its Contents and Signs descend, they say:
	(551). [29.1] Alif - it is the first or the initial letter of Allah, the One; Laam - it is the first or the initial letter of the Name of Allah, Latif, The Most Gentle; Meem - it is the first or the initial letter of the Name of Allah, Mumin, The Giver of Faith. When you combine Alif Laam Meem - But by the leave of Allah, the Most Gentle, one shall not know what Faith is or have the possession of it.
	(552). [29.11] Allah alone is the knower of the righteous and the hypocrites. It is not for the man to assess one another’s belief; if they do so they are rejecters.
	(553). [29.12]  If anyone says, ‘I will help you’, believing in his strength forgetting Allah for a moment, it is shaitan who has made him forget himself at that moment. To deliver such  words and acceptance of the same forgetting Allah is shirk or association to Allah on both sides. This is a sin Allah takes into the count unless one seeks forgiveness from the Most Merciful, at the earliest when he remembers the mistake.
	(554). [29.20] Allah causes a creation to ‘be’ from nothingness by His Command “Be!” and then He originates the latter growth to grow through male and female union. Allah creates even without a male agency as he had created Esa, the Prophet; and the first creation of man the Adam, He created by a word Him, “Be!” And Allah is Able over all things.
	(555). [29.28] Indecencies and loathsome instinct do exist as satanic influences in the minds of the worldly people, but to fight them out by the help of Allah is what is enjoined upon us; and Allah gives glad tidings to the people that His help is near to those who fear His admonition; thus evil and indecent instincts lurking in the secret crevices of one’s heart is bound to get destroyed by the Mighty, the Wise, as he gains maturity of the knowledge and rises up in wisdom. And through the maturity of knowledge we are protected by the Almighty from the shameless exhibition of indecencies; but in the case of the people of Lut, Allah had deserted them; and they had grown insolent to the point of inviting the wrath of Allah upon them as a lasting curse. The people of Lut are the first of the kind who exhibit and proclaim with loud nastiness that such acts of extreme dirtiness, lewdness, lust and the moral looseness are not to be viewed so, but as one of natural physical needs and shall be honoured as individual rights of any sophisticated society. 
	(556). [29.31] It is not that any affliction befalls in the earth or in us, befalls without prior decree upon it; and it is easy to Allah 57.22. Here the affliction is pre told to Ibrahim through the messengers from among the malayika sent down by Allah to destroy the town of Lut. If we are muslims unto Allah, then we shall believe in the messengers from among the malayikas assigned to each one of us. Believe in Allah and Believe in the Messenger Malayikas of Allah, who guide us all by the leave of Allah through our lives.
	(557). [29.34] There is a clear Sign and message from Allah that by His leave, the malayikas - the angels would command and generate the secret powers of the sky to create a suitable atmosphere and environment by the leave of Allah; and that the angels shall obey man by Allah’s leave, all that a man when he wish a thing from the will of Allah, all he has to do is to turn to Allah and say, ‘My God! Thou art the Hearer; the Seer’ and then creative forces begin to gather and change in the heavens and in the earth and in everything in between, to create an entirely new universe that suits the individual nature of the souls concerned.
	(558). [29.46] Allah says those who argue over His verses for vanity are the unbelievers and transgressors(40.4). Each verse of the Book is Guidance to the mankind all through their lives to their Hereafter; each one is an unique creation having a mind of his own, a goal of his own and in all their efforts towards achieving them, each one suffers his own self-incurred problems. Every single verse of the Book, delivers them all, through its manifest Signs as revealed to each by Allah. Thus, to each one of the billions of population at any given time, every single verse guides one to the Truth. As long as anyone who believes in Allah and the last day, he is a believer; to such believers, Allah gives guidance through His Ayats interpreting each one according to the situation and context of the one, concerned. So such believers would not negate or argue with anyone's interpretation of the ayats, but would say, "We believe in what is sent down to us; and we believe in what is sent down to you." And would conclusively say to each other, "Our God and your God is One, Allah."
	(559). [29.64] One shall not follow the majority on the earth for their life is but vanity and arrogance 
	(560). [30.1] Alif  ‘A’ - is the initial of Allah, meaning the God of all the worlds; Laam ‘L’ - is the initial of Lathif, meaning The Gentle; Meem ‘M’ - is the initial of Mumin, meaning the Believer. Thus, the combined meaning of the three Initials is: The God of all the worlds, Allah, is Most Gentle, towards the Believers.
	(561). [30.2] But, it has only strengthened their belief in Allah, in a greater way.
	(562). [30.30] Allah created us from the nothingness of dust even - from absolute nothingness. Do we have anything to hypothesise or theorise about the creation of dust even? Are we, then, the ones who would universalise man invented clown-science, against the universality of the “Signs of Allah”?
	(563). [30.51] Allah does not expect a believer becoming an unbeliever when from Allah touches them a trial on account of their own deed. If they do so, they are a people dead.
	(564). [31.1] Alif, A - the initial or the first letter of Allah, meaning, “The None but He, The One!” Laam, L - the initial of the first letter of Allah’s Name ‘Latheef’, meaning, “the Most Gentle, the Most Astute”. Meem, M - the initial of the word ‘Muttaqeen’, meaning, “The God-fearing”. And thus, the meaning of Alif, Laam, Meem - A L M is: Allah(A) assures the Most Gentle(L) life in this world, for the God-fearing(M).
	(565). [31.2] This Book contains the Wisdom of Allah for the humankind and its every word of the six thousand odd verses are the Signs of Allah. So, unless, in the Name of Allah, our will is to elevate us comprehensively, high above the contemporary level of understanding, ‘The Reading’ is unyielding.
	(566). [31.10]  Allah creates what He will, in the fashion He deem; and there are no two creations that are similar; for, Allah is not a copier of His creations. His every creation is a new phenomenon by itself and He is needless of the support of any of His creations in His Sovereignty. He is God, the None but He - Allah.
	(567). [31.27] The Names of Allah means, His Words. And, the Word of Allah means, His Names. If we say Allah had 99 names, then we give Names to Allah and limit Allah within 99, whereas Allah is limitless.
	(568). [32.1] Alif, A - the initial or the first letter of Allah, meaning, “The None but He, The One!” Laam, L - the initial of the first letter of Allah’s Name ‘Latheef’, meaning, “the Most Gentle, the Most Astute”. Meem, M - the initial of the word ‘Muttaqeen’, meaning, “The God-fearing”. And thus, the meaning of Alif, Laam, Meem - A L M is: Allah(A) assures the Most Gentle(L) life in this world, for the God-fearing(M). 
	(569). [33.40] Muhammad means the God-chosen, ‘glorious personality’ for each and every community as a Messenger - as the bringer of the Truth, bidding the right and forbidding the evil in their respective communities. They disallowed their sons to behave with them as their fathers, but each Messenger taught his children how to obey their father as a Messenger unto them, as he is a Messenger unto other people. 
	(570). [33.50] This verse is most important, for Allah has placed in it His Wisdom, which He reveals to whom He pleases of His bondmen. With such verses, Allah sends astray in whose hearts is lewdness and guides aright who is God-fearing and righteous. Let us take the first part of the very first sentence of the above verse:
   	“O Prophet! We have indeed made lawful to you - those wives to whom you have given their dowries.”
    	There is no need for a grand favour or a special grant from God to be given to between a husband and wife in matters of sexual relations, for this has been ever a blessing by God upon every married couple, leave alone the Prophet. So denouncing sex, something else more important than sex is made lawful for the Prophet’s stature - that is that He strives in the Cause of Allah, all his life. Now you can understand the rest of the sentences of the verse without the evil and indecent diseases in the hearts. And, this is the reason why after the Prophet, none shall marry ‘his wives’ - for, they were not for sex, even to the Prophet(33:53). They were lawful to the Prophet in that they shall strive in the Cause of Allah along with the Prophet by reaching out with the Messages, to the women folks of their society.
 	(571). [33.53] Allah condemns speaking Hadiths.
	(572). [33.59] Wherever you go on the earth, O, women! Wear a garment traditional to that land; this is the easy way that the people of the land will pleasingly see you as one among them in a friendly manner, and this shall prevent them from treating you as a stranger.
	(573). [34.13] Verily, it is from the time of Dawood and Sulaiman the magnificent architectures came into existence in this world by the leave of Allah; and, in this, the jinns with their ‘knowledge of fire’ are to help the humans in a major way to get them their desires of this world.
    (574). [35.1] The  greater the numbers of the wings, the heavier the messages that the angels do carry for the people or against a people.
    (575). [35.31] What is before us is the Quran most of which is lost from the minds of the people. So, this Book is a reminder to all those who ponder the Signs of it; and, its Signs are the testimony to the revealing manifestations all around every individual, as the rewards and the sufferings affecting even a nation as a whole. Those who ponder the Signs of the Book of Allah are His bondmen and of them He chooses the successors to the Book, Quran.
    (576). [35.32] After Allah revealed this Book, The Quran to Muhammad, Allah chooses the successors to the Book of His bondmen for espousing the path of brotherhood and oneness of humanity, by Allah, The Creator of all worlds. He reveals to the Peers He has chosen, gives them the clear Signs of The Book, Enlightening them. Such compeers are there around the world, in the capitals of all nations (28/59;  42/7) of every tongue (14/4), all the time (5/15, 19;  17/15), till the end of the world (17/58).
    (577). [35.38] Allah has set a very secret connection between the heavens and the earth, and the heart of man. The Creator of all secrets and the Knower of all secrets, Allah, rules between the heart of a man and all his affairs, all his life (8/24). He commands the heavens and the earth and everything in between to fall in line, by the secrets of his heart. Therefore, a man earns either the harm or the benefit as to the nature of his secrets. The pious are those who fear their evil secrets in their hearts, for they are well aware of their disease in their hearts (2/10).
	(578). [36.1] These two words are the initials of the Glorious Names of Allah. ‘Ya’ is the first letter of the Name Yaqeen, meaning 		the Firmness. And ‘Seen’ is the first letter of the word Subhan, meaning the Most Pure. Thus Ya-Seen is, “O ye, who show Firmness to 		Purity!”
	(579). [37.79] The Universes are our caretakers by Allah’s leave, as they are subjected to us if we are devout-servants to Allah.
	(580). [37.88] The people of his clan began hurting him throwing slighting remarks at him
	(581). [37.137] When the angels descended on the town of Lut, the destruction of the city was inevitable; so the angels prompted Prophet Lut in the early hours, and hastened him and his people out of the town since the appointed time for his people was early morning. And then the town was destroyed. If we remember, mostly, the destructions of various parts of the world has taken place in the morning hours. This ayat brings our memory to such events that have shattered every part of the world, and it is very much true that we walk on them who were destroyed and decayed, and reduced to scattered dust under our feet.
	(582). [37.140] Yunus was caught as one of the suspects; unable to decide on the guilty they cast lots and named him to be abandoned.
	(583). [37.145] While Yunus tarried in the belly of the whale, he was sick in his heart; yet, he focussed on Allah more and more and repented constantly, was increasing his faith in Him. Allah admitted his repentance, forgave him, and cast him onto the plains while he was still sick in the heart, to see how he behaved then, that he was placed in a better position. Allah says there is no sickness in a man except that his heart is sick. Yunus did show thanks to Allah, and Allah was pleased with His bondman. Then and there Allah gave Yunus His sustenance by which he was relieved of his sickness.
	(584). [38.1] Saad is the first letter of one of the Names of Allah ‘Sabr’, which means “The Forbearing”. Allah begins the chapter by addressing those who endure with patience, as: “O, the Forbearing!”
	(585). [38.8] Allah alone knows and chooses amongst a population to whom to hand over His Revelation as a Reminder for the entire humanity(6:124). Allah chooses the messengers who think and get at the Truth and who will neither find pride in, nor side with, nor believe in the human standards of literacy. In short, the people who seek pride in their human being invented education and literacy will call their respective Messengers, an Illiterate.
	(586). [38.34] The steeds which he adorned forgetting Allah were thrown as dead bodies on to his throne and His kingdom fell. Then he turned to His God, repentant. And Allah forgave him for a much greater benevolence to be showered on him than the kingdom he has lost. And Allah teaches Sulaiman, what and how to pray for the largest Benevolence as below:
	(587). [38.35] We shall understand from the above that our love for the worldly things (9:24) and nature(57:20), in preference to the fear of God, fails us in the end; and, at that time we shall turn to Allah in repentance, for a greater bestow upon us, to which there shall be no successor.
	(588). [38.44] Here, we are to remember the Sign and Ayat of Allah from 41:34. The ayat says: Good and evil or not equal; repel the evil with that which is better; then, between whom and you were enmity before, will develop a bosom friendship. This development of salam between the human beings is the solemn oath we had made with our God, Allah, and we are not break the covenant. Allah says that to such of them who have held on to the compact, the goodly reward for them is the grant of patience and endurance. Ayyub was an enduring, first servant of Allah.
	(589). [38.61] Allah promises twofold punishment for the dwellers of hell(7:38; 11:20; 25:69). Even as they suffer the extraordinary pain and the burning of the Fire, and more curse from Allah, from the malayika, from the messengers and the righteous people descending on them, see here what they are looking for!
	(590). [38.78] Allah promises twofold punishment for the dwellers of hell(7:38; 11:20; 25:69). Even as they suffer the extraordinary pain and the burning of the Fire, and more curse from Allah, from the malayika, from the messengers and the righteous people descending on them, see here what they are looking for! Allah’s curse shall be with Iblis until the Day of Reckoning and he shall live as long without death has been His decision long before. Unaware of this, Iblis seeks the same from Allah as a promise from Him. Allah is All-Aware, Almighty.
	(591). [40.1] Ha - it is the initial letter of the word ‘Hai,’ meaning “The Life”. And Meem - it is the initial letter of the word ‘Muttaqeen,’ meaning “The God-fearing.” Thus the meaning of Ha-Meem together is: “For the God-fearing, this is Life Granting.“
	(592). [40.11] The death and the raising up during the life in this world is the sleep and the waking up; and then, the second death is the final resting, until the day of resurrection when we are raised up again. We think, plan and plot all kinds of ill-deeds disbelieving the Day of Reckoning when we will be brought before our God, Allah, for the just and eternal reward.
	(593). [40.13] He who gives a thought and revels in, and reveres in the Only Mighty Power is because of his constant reflection trying to know things from His Ruh; the God endowed Soul. The Ruh or Soul is that that gives him the answer when he seeks within him. It gives him the clarity of thought that gives him the knowledge about everything he is created with. It gives him the vision and the wisdom of the future and the Hereafter, and that it takes him to the Throne of his Kingdom by His leave. 
	(594). [41.1] ‘Ha’ is the initial letter of the word ‘Huq’ which means, ‘The Truth.” And, ‘Meem’ is the initial letter of the word ‘Muttaqeen’, meaning, “The God-fearing.” Now the meaning of the two letters “Ha Meem” together is: “This is the Truthful Path for the God-fearing.”
	(595). [41.14] Ruh-ul-Amin and Ruh-ul-Quddus are the two Angelical Messengers that Guard every human soul or the Ruh of Allah, before and behind it, from the influences of the Shaitan; Allah sends them as unseen forces, which the Jinns would be able to sense, outright; and thus, the accursed shaitans are being driven faraway. Allah saves His bondmen thus.
	(596). [41.35]No one shall possess the highest degree of competence against the all prevailing enmity, except those who Keep Patience; and, but for the Highly Blessed, none shall attain that Patience.
	(597). [41.36] Whenever you are incited and find you are on the verge of losing patience, return to Allah and seek His refuge. Keep up your highness from the Highest.
	(598). [42.1] ‘Ha’ is the initial letter of the word ‘Hai’ which means, ‘The Giver of Life.” And, ‘Meem’ is the initial letter of the word ‘Muttaqeen’, meaning, “The God-fearing.” Now the meaning of the two letters “Ha Meem” together is: “This is the Life Giver for the God-fearing.”
	(599). [42.2] ‘Ain’ is the initial letter of the word ‘Ilm’ which means, “The Wisdom of Allah.” And, ‘Seen’ is the initial letter of the word ‘Subhan’ which means, “The Purest’. And, ‘Qaf’ is the initial letter of the word ‘Qahhar’ which means, “The Controller.” Now the combined meaning of the three letters, i.e., the Initials of Allah is: Those who seek the Wisdom of Allah, may they entrust them with The Purest, Who Controls their destructive emotions and makes them and their posterity prosper in Peace. The attainment of Peace is the evidence of The God Endowed Wisdom.
	(600). [42.12] Only through the heavens, we shall reach the earth for our lives on it; without the heavens coming down upon the earth, we have no provisions as air, water or food. The keys to reaching the heavens wherefrom we shall bring us each, our measures to this world is with Allah. Seek only Allah’s guidance for the sustenance and pleasantness, and expansion of such comforts here in this world. But what most of us do here is, merely grazing the ground and squandering away the provisions of it, unjustly and beyond measures. Stop living this way. Turn to Allah for the Keys to the heavens and then return to the earth by His will, with the just measures from Him, for each of your lives in the world.
	(601). [42.41] Ordinary view of the justice and injustice is as - one as the right, and the other, as the wrong; every thought and act has a reason behind it; the important aspect, behind the reason, is the reasoning applied to the presenting circumstances, and the circumstances not being the same between one moment and the next is the reality. Accordingly, the reality by itself becomes a subject matter for the review of opinions from different perspectives; and, the directions from whichever angle every individual arrives at his opinion rests on his wisdom, and not upon his worldly knowledge. Therefore, humans are advised by the Almighty and the Most Wise, not to judge anyone from what he feels as right or wrong. But observe patience while seeking penitence for his misgivings; such are the people who guard against all misfortunes, and they are the ones who abound in the blessings of Allah. 
	(602). [43.1] ‘Ha’ is the initial letter of the word “Hai”, which means “The Giver of Life”. And, ‘Meem’ is the initial letter of the word “Muttaqeen”, which means “The God-fearing”. Now, the meaning of the two terms together is: ”For the God-fearing, this is the Giver of Life!” 
	(603). [43.33] Here, ‘The Most Benevolent’ says, if only the believers do not go for this world’s extravagant life and merge with the branded people - He would have increased the ‘faithless in the Most Benevolent’ to taste the pride of this world to the maximum. And, whereby the doom is cast upon them. What Allah promises the faithful in the Most Beneficent is the ever-lasting pleasantness in this world and the next.
    (604). [43.61] On the Hour, we shall all be raised from our graves; and, Isa - he is the only Prophet and the Messenger to show this Sign to the people of all worlds so that they believed in the Last Day and the Day of Reckoning.
	(605). [44.1] “Ha” is the initial letter of the word, “Hakim” which means, “The Wisdom”. And Meem is the initial letter of the word, “Muttaqeen” which means, “The God-fearing”. Thus the combined meaning of the two letters together is: “This is The Wisdom for The God-fearing.”
	(606). [45.1] “Ha” is the initial letter of the word, “Hakim” which means, “The Wisdom”. And Meem is the initial letter of the word, “Muttaqeen” which means, “The God-fearing”. Thus the combined meaning of the two letters together is: “This is The Wisdom for The God-fearing.”
	(607). [46.1] “Ha” is the initial letter of the word, “Hakim” which means, “The Wisdom”. And Meem is the initial letter of the word, “Muttaqeen” which means, “The God-fearing”. Thus the combined meaning of the two letters together is: “This is The Wisdom for The God-fearing.”
	(608). [46.24] What we may think about the present, or the life to come is different from what Allah intends for us. Seek from Allah: “You are the Bringer of life from the dead!” With this remembrance we, by His Favour, rejuvenate into an enlivening future - a Promise given to the believing patient-ones.
	(609). [48.18] 1. The “Tree” here denotes the shade it gives, the fruits it bears for you, the comfort it gives you, the relaxation it brings to your mind, the calm atmosphere that it bestows all around by Allah’s command - in all, under The Tree means, Under The Blessings of the Almighty. Allah tested the faithfulness of the faithful under such Bountiful Graciousness. What Allah now expects of us is to bear witness under such situations in our lives, so that we shall not fail to swear allegiance to Allah, with all our hearts! And Allah warns us not to touch The Tree in 2:35.
   	(610). [50.17] We think we do a lot of things going about the places, seeing the people hoping to get things done our way; no, wherever we go or turn to there are the appointed angels, one on either side of us recording all our deeds, the left and the right. They, by Allah’s leave, either admonish us or give us glad news accordingly, as and when we are righteous, or fall into evil. We are to believe now that whatever our hearts are admonished with, or blessed with the glad news will come to pass sooner or later. Before it happens, there is definitely a time period granted to us by the Most Merciful, to correct and mend.         
	(611). [56.21] So far Allah has narrated the gardens, the eternal abode for the foremost of the mankind; and what follows from the next verse is about what Allah details for the foremost of the womankind. Such are the Hurul Eins, the womankind bound for the Paradises.
	(612). [56.22] The womankind bound for the paradises are the Hurul Eins. The insight of womankind, the Hurul Eins of the gardens shall outstrip all evils and hurdles; their vision is wide, comprehensively immense.
	(613). [56.23] The Hurul Eins, the womankind are free of pride despite their insight, and are like that of hidden pearls.
	(614). [56.25] The womankind of Paradises is placed in such majesty. And in the next verse Allah completes the message relating to the Hurul Eins, the foremost of the womenkind.
	(615). [56.34] With this Allah’s detailing for the mankind of the right-hand ends. And what follows in the next three verses is concerning the womankind of the right-hand. Allah’s word has gone forth in that the women of the foremost will be raised up in the newest creation, splendid and awesome in form. And we shall remember here, Allah has intended this for the women foremost and the righteous; and, we know that when Allah intends a thing, He has to say to it, ‘Be’, and it is. The foremost of the women of this world are this kind to be when they are raised up all anew a creation. Now about the women of the right-hand; let us see what Allah says concerning them-
	(616). [56.78] In every verse of this Book, its dignity and nobility are firmly established, a revelation for those who reflect upon them.
	(617). [59.19] Whoever forgets his wrongs is like he has forgotten Allah i.e., he has forgotten the righteous path of Allah. In the real sense, because of his continued defiance of obedience to Allah’s Benevolence, it is Allah who has abandoned him to make him wander, astray.
	(618). [66.2] Ref: 8.58; 9.1, 9.4
	(619). [68.1] ‘Nun’ is the first letter, or the initial of Allah’s Name “Nur,” meaning, The Light. The rejecters let loose all evil and contemptuous writings against the chosen Prophets and Messengers. But Allah enlightens them with His Mercy and protects them by His Wisdom. 
	(620). [68.17] It has been the practice of the people of that time to give the fruits and provisions to the needy when they come upon them during harvesting; but here were certain companions of the gardens which were averse to such practices and vowed not to involve in charities because of their greed for the wealth and provisions.
	(621). [69.37] These are the Hadiths - the Details inspired by Allah to His Angelical Messenger who reveals them by His leave, to the chosen Messenger from among the people. And Allah bears witness to it, as the Angelical Messenger reveals, thus:
	(622). [70.14] It is not to be so because he himself has become the fuel of fire ( ref: 2.24).
	(623). [70.19] Every moment we are created into a newer being, based on our good deeds and evil deeds, that haply we taste the fruits of our works, the good for the good, and the bad for the bad. Whoever follows Allah, and keeps up patience, he is created anew as a forbearing one; likewise, the impatient ones are created as intolerant. Allah warns us that most human beings thus created, are very impulsive.
	(624). [70.39] Every moment we are newly created by God according to the nature of our changing conducts so that we are recompensed justly for what our hands have worked and sent forth before. Everyone’s conscience knows if he is bad or good; he knows who he is in the eyes of Allah; and, Allah’s word is true, that each of us will be created in the manner, we changed our habits rebelliously against Allah’s Command.
	(625). [71.10] Drought and famine are the consequences of the evils of a population that does not seek forgiveness from its God, and for being insolent (11.52).
	(626). [72.16] Allah creates all living beings from water; here, ‘the plentiful watering’ states that the people will be enlivened with the nature’s blooming liveliness all around.
	(627). [72.19] Surely the servants of Allah do not appreciate this crowding; rather he would say, ‘I only to turn to my God; and you turn to Allah likewise, if your wish is to follow me or obey me.”
	(628). [74.15] All the while Allah kept sending him His Messages through the chosen Messenger with warnings that he obeyed Allah and His Messenger, that he be humble, feed the poor, give to the needy, and restrain from being a froward. But he denied them all with an obstinate rejection.
	(629). [74.22] He cried lies to the Messages.
	(630). [74.23] And called the Messages a sorcerer’s invention and a lie.
	(631). [76.1] Before the humans were Originated, there was the design of Allah, “The Man on the Earth!” And the Word from Him, “Be” has foregone. Then there was this span of time for us in the space before we were shaped up in human form as, “The Man upon the earth”. While each of us was individually traversing the infinite space freely, before our creation on the earth, we were inspired by the Almighty Originator, the Truth about every aspect of His Creations and Him. And our need to be looking forward to Him alone for the Guidance through spacious life, when they shall be placed on the earth. And that forms the ‘Soul of our Conscience’, His Ruh or Command, which was breathed into us by Allah when He raised us up on the earth in form and shape as human beings.
    (632). [76.2] The trial from Allah is that each man knows well his unseen power and wisdom inspired in him while he was unformed, and in a state of dispersion in the space. Then, when he was to be created from the earth, he was given a physical formation with ears and eyes, for hearing and seeing, - while inspiring with the unseen power and the wisdom, breathing into his bosom. And that becomes the Soul of man, exhibiting His Conscience, the Truth of his Universal Being. So, in all the moments of man’s life the true nature of everything he hears and sees, is discerned by his hidden power and wisdom. The external ears and eyes have always been a manifest deception to the open mind or the insight of man. And thereby the trial starts for man from his first breath. Those who use their minds receive the Guidance and those who use their external hearing and sight are put to hardship.
	(633). [76.6] Allah commands us to spend of the good things Allah has provided you from the earth and from that which you have earned. May the believers know that they are people who are called to spend in the path of Allah (47.38). The water scarcity people suffer is because of their not giving water to the people, and restraining even the natural flow of water to other people.
    (634). [76.26] Until Allah captures your soul in the night and you fall to sleep, keep exalting the attributes of Allah, remembering Him with gratitude. Never deviate in your thoughts away from Allah, and plunge not into the transgression, despondency or earthly fantasies and fancies.
	(635). [76.27] As people are hasty to acquire the worldly pleasures, they become unmindful of the evils contracted with it, further, their indifference towards the harmful consequences makes them aggressors. And that leaves them at the end of the day, a day laden with wretchedness in their hearts and weariness in their body, a telltale sign of the evil portents surrounding them.
	(636). [79.24] That is the height of all his sins; so no further for him is the delay of punishment.
    (637). [88.6] Today there is not a single vegetation on the earth as our food, even milk and water and air that we have not poisoned by our hands; we are deadly living, as living dead. Hell has started here for most, most of the inhabitants of the earth. No one changes Allah’s words, and there is no change in the Way of Allah.















 

			












