
The Quran



Chapter 1
Victory upon Victory

1.1        All glory be to Allah, the God of the worlds.(1)       	
1.2  	Most Benevolent, Merciful.(2)
1.3	Master of the day's Proceedings.(3)
1.4	It is You who we obey; and You who we seek help.
1.5	Keep us on the right course.
1.6	The course of those whom You have blessed;
1.7	And not of those upon who is Your anger and who had gone astray.


Chapter 2
The Cow

2.1	Alif, Laam, Meem - A L M(4) 
2.2    	This is The Book! There is no doubt in it, is the fairness for those who fear.(5)
2.3	They believe in the Unseen, constant in God's remembrance (6), and spend generously from what We have provided them.
2.4	And they believe in what is sent(7) to you, and in that which were ­­sent(7) before you, and they believe in the Hereafter.
2.5	These are they who are in their God's right direction(8). And it is them, the victorious.
2:6 	Certainly the rejecters shall not believe whether you warn them or warn them not.
2.7	Allah has placed a seal upon their hearts(9) and listening(10), and upon their sight is the gloom(11). And for them is a painful punishment.
2.8	And among men are those who say, "We have Faith in Allah(12) and the Last(13) Day." But they are not faithful.
2.9	They wish to deceive Allah and the faithful; it is nothing but betraying themselves, yet they do not know.
2.10	In their hearts is the disease(14). And Allah has furthered their disease; to them is the painful agony because they lie. 
2.11    	And when said to them, "Create not mischief in the earth", they say: we are the 'PeaceKeepers!"
2.12	Lo! certainly, they are the corrupters; but they do not understand.(15)
2.13    	And when said to them, "Believe as the believing men", they say: "shall we believe as the stupid ones believe?" Certainly, it is them stupid; yet they do not learn.
2.14	And when they meet with the believers they say, "We are believers." But when they are alone in the company of evil jinn(16) and men, they say, "Surely we are with you; we only mock."
2.15	Allah mocks at these and leaves them astray in their bewildered wilderness. 
2.16	It is these who have procured the evil-path(17) in exchange for the straight path. Their trade will not profit them, and they are not to attain the straight path. 
2.17 	The parable to such is the one who kindled a fire(18); when it began to spread its light around him, Allah had taken away their light and left them in the utter darkness of zero vision.
2.18	They are deaf, dumb and blind; so they will not return.(19)
2.19 	Or, it is like the torrents pouring down from the sky with thunder and lightning through the pitch-dark. Fearing the deadly thunder-peel, they push their fingers into their ears. But Allah always surrounds the rejecters.
2.20	It seems the lightning would snatch away their sight - when it flashes they walk in it, and they are still when the darkness encompasses them. However, if Allah so wish He would make them lose their hearing and sight(20). Verily, Allah has power over all things. 
2.21    	O humankind, turn to your God who created you and your ancestors, haply you might become God-fearing(21).
2.22	He spread out the earth, and made the sky a protective ceiling and pours down the rain from it wherewith He brings forth the fruits in all forms and varieties as your food. Create not associations(22) to Allah, while you know.
2.23	And if you are in doubt concerning what We have bestowed upon Our bondman, and if you are truthful about it, then gather all your helpers save Allah and bring forth a chapter(23) like herein. 
2.24	Bring your proof - surely it is impossible for you. Fear the hellfire whose fuel is men and stones. It is destined for those who reject.
2.25	Give good news to those who believe and behave; to them are the paradises beneath which are the rivers flowing; whenever they were given fruits thereof, they would say, "This is what we were given before." Nay, they were given the like of it. And therein for them are pure companions, and they will abide there forever.(24) 
2.26      Allah is not shy of giving the example of a mosquito or what is smaller than it. Certainly, those who believe know it is the truth from their God; but those who reject the truth say: "what does Allah wish by this example?" With this He sends many astray, and guides many in the straight path; but, except the evil ones, He shall not let go straying.(25)
2.27    	They break their promises(26) to Allah after ascertaining. They sever that which Allah had ordained to keep united, and spread chaos on the earth; they are the losers.
2.28    	How can you refuse to believe in Allah? He gave you life when you were lifeless; then He would cause you to die; and, He would give you life again. And you shall be returned unto Him.
2.29    	He created for you all the things in the earth; then He turned(27) to the sky and perfected it into seven firmaments. And, He is the Knower of all things.
2.30	And when your God said to the inhabitants of the skies, "I am going to place on the earth My authority(28)," they said, "Are You going to place him who create mischief in it and shed blood while we exalt Your glory and sanctify Your purity?" He said, "Surely I know what you do not know."
2.31	And He taught Adam the truth of all things and presented them before the inhabitants of the sky(29) and said, "Speak of your knowledge regarding these if you are truthful."
2.32	They said, "You are the MostPure; we have no knowledge of anything except that which You taught us. Surely You are The Wise, The Astute.(30)
2.33	He said, "O Adam! Reveal them all to them." And when he revealed them all, He said, "Did I not say to you, certainly I know the secrets of the skies and the earth, and I know what you openly do and what you hide?"
2.34	Then, when We turned to the inhabitants of the sky(31) and said, "Obey Adam," all prostrated, save Iblis. He refused with overborne pride, and he became of the rejecters. 
2.35	And We said to Adam: You and your companion abide in this garden of Paradise, and eat thereof freely where you wish. But never Touch the Tree(32) lest you will be of the transgressors."
2.36    	Then Shaitan made them fall from grace and thus were a fallout. And We said, "Descend! You will be disputing with one another; and, on the land for you is a sojourn and a provision."
2.37	Then Adam received guidance from his God; and more, He forgave him. Surely He is Most Forgiving, Merciful.
2.38	We said, "Descend ye, all; whoever obeys when My Guidance comes they shall fear not; nor would they grieve."(33)
2.39	But those who reject and belie Our Guidance26, they are the people of Hell, and they will abide therein for ever.(34)
2.40	O the descendants of Israel! Remember My gracious favour I bestowed upon you. Abide by My promise(35); and, I will fulfil your promise(36); and, fear Me alone. 
2.41	And believe in what I sent down; this stands testimony to your conscience; and, do not become the foremost in open rejection of it; and, make it not a sell-out to your lowly desires. And fear Me alone. 
2.42	And do not make a blend of the truth with falsehood while ye know; and, never conceal the truth.
2.43	Have consistency in the remembrance of Allah. And spend your life in Purity. And show humility before those who are humble.(37)
2.44    	Do you command righteousness upon mankind, forgetting yourself(38), and yet you read the Scripture? Will you not understand?
2.45	And seek Help through patience and good deeds(39); surely, it is a mighty task except for those who fear God. 
2.46    	The believers are they who say, "We are to meet with our God and unto Him is our return."
2.47	O, the descendants of Israel, remember My Grace I bestowed upon you, and that I endowed you above all beings.
2.48	And fear the Hour when one cannot in the least help another; no intercession will be allowed, nor ransom for him shall be accepted; and, they will not be helped.
2.49	And that We freed you from the gruesome torture of the people of Firaun - they killed your male children and left your female children to survive. In it was a test severe for you, from your God.
2.50    	And We cleaved asunder the sea for you and rescued you; and, We drowned the people of Firaun while you witnessed.
2.51    	And We promised Musa forty nights(40). Then after him, you took to the calf, and you were arrogant.
2.52	We forgave you even after this haply you should show gratitude.
2.53	And for you to follow the straight path, the Book We gave Musa, and the Furqan - the Book, Distinguishing.
2.54	And Musa said to his people, "O my people! You have done a grave injustice to you by taking to the calf; henceforth, seek forgiveness from your Creator and sacrifice yourself (41). Only this shall bring you good reward from your Creator. He has forgiven you; verily, He accepts repentance, and He is Merciful.
2.55	And when you said, "O Musa, until we see Allah before our very eyes, we shall not believe you(42)," a severe thunder-rupture ripped you while you were seeing.
2.56    	And We brought you back to your life so that you shall show gratitude.
2.57    	And we made the clouds hover above you; we sent down upon you mannu-salwa (43). "Eat of the pure foods that We have provided." They had done nothing against Us but they wronged themselves.
2.58    	Further, We said, "Enter this city, and relish thereof wherever abundantly; and when you enter its gate, enter with piety and say: "Repentance!"(44) We would forgive you for your sins; and, to those who do good We would grace them.
2.59      But the arrogant ones changed this prayerful word, into another word, and so We sent down the torment from the sky(45) upon the corrupters for their wrong.
2.60    	And when Musa prayed for water for his people, We said, "Strike that rock with your staff." Therefrom sprouted twelve springs; indeed each section recognised their water course. "Eat and drink of what Allah has provided; do not cause mischief on the earth(46)."
2.61    	And when you said, "O Musa, we will not tolerate the same food. So seek from your God for us to provide us what the earth produces such as its herbs, its cucumbers, its wheat, its lentils and its onions", he said, "Do you exchange that which is fruitful for that which is worth little? If so, then descend ye down on any other township; certainly, you would get what you ask for." Upon them is cast poverty and disgrace; and, they drew on them the wrath of Allah. It is because they rejected the Signs of Allah and their unjust killing (47) of the prophets; and, this wretchedness has come on them for their constancy in opposition and oppression.
2.62    	Be they the Believers, the Jews, the Christians or the other Sects - whosoever of them believe in Allah and His justice, and hence guard them in good conduct, their goodly reward is with their God. And they have no fear, nor would they grieve.
2.63    	And remember when We raised 'Thur' (48) above you and took the covenant from you and said, "Have a firm hold on to what We have given you and ponder over it. So that you will become pious."
2.64    	But then you were reckless; and, had there not been Allah's mercy and grace upon you, you would have been the losers.(49)
2.65    	And indeed you know about the people amongst you who transgressed on Saturdays. We said to them, "Become apes, despised."(50)
2.66    	And We made this a lesson for the people of the old and for those who shall follow them, and, a glad tiding to those who guard. 
2.67    	And when Musa said to his people, "Allah surely commands you that you should sacrifice the cow (51)," they said: "Do you take us for mocking?" He said, "I seek protection from Allah, I shall not become one of the ignorant."
2.68  	They said, "Ask your God for us, the nature of it." He said, "He says, the cow is neither matured nor a calf, but its nature is between the two. So do what you are commanded to do." 
2.69      They said, "Ask your God for us its colour." He said, "He says the colour of the cow indeed is yellow; and, it is deep in its tint. Its shade is fascinating to those who look at it."
2.70    	They said, "Pray to your God for us; He would make plain to us as to what kind it is; Certainly to us, all cows look the same. Allah willing, surely we will be guided."
2.71    	He said, "Indeed He says the cow is neither used to till the land nor used to water the fields; it is very healthy and without a scar." They said, "Only now you have brought the right description," and sacrificed the cow unable to contend any further.(52)
2.72      	And you killed a man,  and then you engaged in an argument as to the crime; but, Allah did bring to light that which you hid.
2.73      	We said, "Punish the guilty with that part of his crime (53)." Such is Allah's creation of liveliness from the deadliness. And Allah thus teaches wisdom through His judgement. 
2.74      	Your hearts have hardened even after this; and, did become rock-hard(54); and much harder than that. Most certainly there are rocks wherefrom rivers do flow; and, there are rocks which would slit for the seepage of water; and, there are some, which would roll down due to fear of Allah. And Allah is never unaware of what you do.
2.75    	Do you wish these would believe for you? A section of them tampered the Word they heard from Allah, wittingly, while they comprehend it.
2.76	And when they meet the believers they say, "We too are believers", but when they go privily one to another, they say: Do you help them with what Allah has taught you so that they argue against you before your God? Have you no understanding?(55)
2.77	Will they not understand that Allah knows what they hide and what they speak out?
2.78	And of them are those who know nothing from the Book except the hearsay. They, but conjure. 
2.79	Woe to them for writing the Scripture with their hands, and then they should say, "This is from Allah, just to earn a mean price; and, woe to them for such writing with their hands; and, woe to them for that they gained thereby.
2.80	And they also say, "Except for a few days we shall not suffer the hellfire." Say: Have you received any such promise from Allah? If so, Allah will not go back on His promise; or, do you say that which you know not, as said by Allah?"(56)
2.81	Yes, whoever earns an evil, and his sin surrounds him - those are the inmates of Fire - they will abide therein forever.
2.82	And those who believe in righteousness and do good, they are the inmates of paradise - they will abide therein forever.
2.83	And We took the oath from the people of Israel, "You shall obey none and nothing besides Allah - Be beneficial to the parents, the relatives, the orphans and the needy; speak soothing words to the people and fear God. And spend of Purity." But a few of you turned away. And you are heedless. 
2.84	And We took the oath, "Shed not blood among you, and chase not one another from their homes." You did admit, and you were witnesses too.
2.85	Yet, it is ye who kill amongst you and drive out a section of ye from their homes, and assist, against them in sins and rancor. Such of them (57) when they come to you pleading, ye ransom them, though to drive them out itself was forbidden. What, do you accept in part of the Book, and reject in part? What then will be the reward of those who do that, except disgrace in this life, and to be returned on the Day of Resurrection to the most terrible punishment. For, Allah is not unaware of all that you do.
2.86    	It is them who have exchanged this world's life, at the price of the Hereafter. Therefore their torment will not be lightened, and they will have no helper. 
2.87    	And certainly We gave Musa the Book, and after him, We sent, series of messengers. Isa, son of Maryam to whom We gave Our clear Signs and strengthened him by the Pure Soul. And were you not boastful whenever your messenger brought to you that which you desire not? You belied some, and some you killed(58).
2.88    	And they say, "Our hearts are veiled." Nay, because of their belying(59) Allah has cursed them. They can never believe but little.
2.89    	And the scripture came to them from Allah, testifying that which they possess in their hearts. Before, they were prayerful to be victorious over the deniers. But now, when the confirmation reaches their soul and affirms what is in their hearts, they deny. Allah's curse is upon such deniers. (60)
2.90   	Outrageous is what they earn by rejecting the grace of Allah out of envy(61), losing out on their souls because Allah has bestowed His benevolence upon whom He willed of His bondsmen. And thus they had invited on them anger upon anger, and a disgraceful punishment awaits for those who deny.
2.91	And when it is said to them, "Adhere to what Allah sent down to you", they say, "We will only stick to our practice." They deny what is above it. But this is the truth. And, it testifies that which they possess. Say: "If you are believers, why did you kill the prophets(62) of Allah before?"
2.92    	Musa indeed brought Clear Signs to you, but then you worshipped the calf, and thus you became miscreants.
2.93    	We raised 'Thur (48) - the bounties of mountainous proportions' above you and took the oath from you this: listen, and hold fast to what We have bestowed upon you. They said, "We heard, and we differ(63)." Because of their disobedience calf was thrust into their hearts. Say: "If you are believers, then whatever your belief commands you, is evil to its worst. " 
2.94    	Say: If you are truthful in your birthright as to the claim that the paradise with Allah is solely for you, and not for others, then "Prefer Death!"
2:95    	But they would not prefer it because of the evil, their hands have sent forth. Certainly, Allah is well aware of the wrong-doers.
2.96	And, you will undoubtedly find their avarice towards this worldly life is more than any other men and worse than the infidels; and, each of them wishes to live for a thousand years. Even if they were given so, they should never escape the punishment. And Allah is ever watchful of all that they do.
2.97    	Say, "Who is the enemy to Jibreel?" Surely, it is he who inspires your mind by the command of Allah, and it reveals what is before it; and, is a guidance and glad news to the believers.(64)
2.98    	Whoever is an enemy to Allah, and His angels, and His messengers; and, to 'Jibreel and Mikhail' (65) - Allah indeed is the enemy to the disbelievers.
2.99    	And indeed We (66) have sent down upon you clear and manifest signs; none shall deny it, save the miscreants. 
2.100   Is it not true that whenever they make a covenant, a party of them breaks it? And therefore most of them will not believe.
2.101   And when a Messenger came to them from Allah who stood witness to what their Souls possessed, a party of the people of the scripture did throw away the Book of Allah behind their backs as if they knew not
2.102   And they, in the Kingdom (67) of Sulaiman followed only the inducements of shaitans. Sulaiman had never been a disbeliever; only the shaitans were the rejecters; and, they taught men the sorcery. And that which has been sent down with the two Angels(68), Harut and Marut in Babyl - The two said, "Surely we are a test unto you and do not be(69) the rejecters of this warning" before they taught any of them. Despite this, they learnt from them that could cause(70) division between husband and wife. Without the permission of Allah, none shall cause any evil upon anyone with this (71). Therefore, they learnt that which should only cast the curse upon them and avail them nought a good; and, indeed they knew well that that which they have bought for a price would provide them with no good for the future. What they bought losing out on their souls is unconscionable evil, if only they knew.
2.103   And if they believe and guard, indeed, the reward from Allah would be much greater; would they not then mind?(72)
2.104  O the believers! Do not say, "Look at us!" Rather say, "Have care for us." And listen(73). To those who refuse is the painful punishment.
2.105  But those of the people of the Book, who disbelieve or associate partners, hate good news being sent down to you from your God. But Allah chooses whom He will for His Mercy. Allah is Most Bountiful.
2.106  When We cause a change in the perception of an ayat or cause it to be forgotten, We are to bring a higher comprehension or the like of it. Know ye not that Allah, over all things, is most Potent?(74)
2.107   Do not you see the kingdom of the skies and the earth belong to Him, Allah? And there is none for you as a protector nor as a helper besides Allah.(75)
2.108   Or, do you want to ask questions to your Messenger as people asked Musa before? He who changes belief with disbelief has surely strayed away from the straight path.(76)
2.109   The majority of the people of the Book, knowing well the Truth, out of envy, want you to go astray after taking the straight path. But forgive them, leave them in their wrong ways until Allah's command comes. Verily, Allah is All Competent.(77)
2.110   And stay constant in the remembrance of Allah, and spend out of His Grace; because whatever good you spend in His cause, you shall receive it from Allah. Verily, Allah is the Knower of all that you do.
2.111   They say, "None but the Jews and the Christians will enter heaven." That is their vain desire. Say, "Bring your proof if you are truthful."
2.112   Yes. Whoever surrenders himself soulfully to Allah, and wishes the good for others, his reward is with his God; and, that they shall neither fear nor grieve.
2.113   And the Jews say: The Christians are not in any right path. And the Christians say: The Jews are not in any right track. But these possess the Book with them; and like the sayings of these, the ignorant also say; but on the Hour, Allah will deliver justice in what they were disputing.(78)
2.114   And, who is more nefarious than he who misbehaves and forbids in the Houses of  Allah (79) where His Names alone are remembered in reverence; they have no rights to enter them but with fear. And, to them is the disgrace in this world, and there is lasting and severe punishment awaits them in the end.
2.115   The East and the West belong only to Allah, and whichever direction you turn to, there is the Face(80) of Allah. Allah is Immense, Cognizant.
2.116   And they say, "Allah has begotten a son." Nay, His word is Pure. Everything in the skies and on the earth belongs to Him; and all bow to His Will.
2.117   He originated the skies and the earth. When He intends a thing, all He says to it is, "Be! And it is."(81)
2.118   And the callous say, "Why does Allah not communicate to us? Or come not to us a Sign?" Thus said those before them as what these people speak; their hearts are all alike. Surely We have explained Our Signs vividly for those who are sure.(82)
2.119   Indeed, We have sent you with the Truth, and as a giver of glad tiding, and a Warner. And you will not be questioned about the companions of the hellfire.
2.120   And the Jews and the Christians will never be satisfied with you until you follow their way. Say, "Surely, the path of Allah is the straight path." And if you follow their desires after the truth has come to you plain, you will neither find a protector nor a helper against Allah. 
2.121  Those to whom We have given the Book, recite it with the truth(83) - they are the believers in it. But those who disbelieve it, they are the losers.
2.122   O the descendants of Israel! Remember My grace I have bestowed upon you; and I showered My blessings upon you, over the whole world.
2.123   And fear a day when no soul shall in aught avail another; neither compensation will be accepted, nor any intercession shall benefit them, nor shall they be helped.(84)
2.124   And God tested Ibrahim by His Words; and, he fulfilled them. He said, "Certainly I, make you the leader of the people. To this said he, "Are they among my descendants also?" He said, "My promise does not hold good for the wrongdoers."(85)
2.125 	House (86) - We made it a living place and a shelter to the people - make Ibrahim's standpoint (87) as the way to follow your God. And we enjoined upon Ibrahim and Ismail and said, " Keep My house pure for those whose hearts revolve around Me - and for those who are humble and surrendering to their God while they live in it." 
2.126   And Ibrahim said, "My God! Make this city, a protected one, and provide with fruits for those who dwell in it as believers in Allah and His judgement. He said, "I will give its fruits for a period, to those who reject belief. And then I will force him to the punishment of fire; and, what an evil homecoming!(88)
2.127   When Ibrahim and Ismail raised the foundation of the house, said: "Our God! Accept from us. Surely, You are All-Hearing, All-Knowing."(89)
2.128   "Our God, make us two of the Muslims, and make a section from among our descendants Muslims unto You; teach us how to pray before You; and, forgive us. You are Most Forgiving, Ever Merciful."(90)
2.129   "Our God, raise up among them a Messenger who would rehearse Your Signs before them; and, shall teach them the wisdom of the Book and purify them - surely, You are the Most Potent, Most Wise."(91)
2.130   Who slights aside the standpoint of Ibrahim - except the one who degrades himself? Indeed, We chose him(92) in this world; and, in the hereafter, surely he will be among the righteous.
2.131   When his God said to him, "Submit in peace," he said, "I have 'submitted in peace' to the God of the worlds."
2.132   And Ibrahim and Yaqub enjoined upon their descendants thus: My descendants! Allah has chosen this straight path to you; therefore, die not without submission in peace. 
2.133   "Or, were you the witnesses when death touched Yaqub?" When he said to his descendants, "Which path will you take after me?" They said, "Your God's path, your forefathers' - the path of Ibrahim, Ismail, Ishaq - the only path of God; and, we belong to Him."(93)
2.134   That community has gone - what they earned is theirs; and, what you earned is yours; you will not be questioned concerning what they used to do.(94)
2.135   They say, "Change your rituals to that of the Jews, or that of the Christians - you will attain the straight path." Say, "Nay, we will follow only the right path of Ibrahim - he was not of the idolaters."(95)
2.136   Say, "We believe in Allah, and in what is revealed to us (96), and in what was revealed to Ibrahim, Ismail, Ishaq and Yaqub - and to the descendants, and what was given to Musa and Isa, and that which was given to all the other prophets of their God. And we shall not find differences amongst any of them (97); and, we are believers unto Him.
2.137   So, if they believe as you believe, surely they too will be guided, but if they turn away they are in schism; and, Allah suffices you as Protector against them. He is Hearing, Knowing.
2.138   "Colourful life of Allah!" Who shall give colour to one's life above Allah? It is Him we call upon.
2.139   Say, "Do you bring us disputes concerning Allah? He is our God and your God. To us are our deeds, and to you, your deeds. And we are pure only to Him."
2.140   Or, "Do you say Ibrahim, and Ismail, and Ishaq, and Yaqub and all their descendants are either Jews or Christians?" Say, "Who knows it better, you or Allah? Who is a worse transgressor than he who conceals the true Signs he has from Allah? Allah is not unmindful of what you do."
2.141   That community has gone - what they earned is theirs; and, what you earned is yours; you will not be questioned concerning what they used to do. 
2.142   The ignorant among the men would say: what made them change the direction they were earlier facing? Say, "To Allah belongs the east and the west; He conducts in righteous course whom He will."
2.143   In this path, we have gathered you as a people, just; this is because you shall be a living witness over the other people while the messenger is the witness over you. We charged you not with the direction(98) except that it might make evident who follows the messenger, and who turns away from him on their heels. It is undoubtedly hard for the others but to those who Allah had guided. Allah will not make your belief go waste. Certainly, Allah, by His Mercy, is tolerant towards people.
 2.144  Indeed, we see your face turning towards the sky; so, We certainly turn you towards the direction of your Will (99); so turn your face to the Will in the RUH of your heart. And wherever you are, turn your faces towards it (99). And indeed, those who have the wisdom, do know for sure, 'this is the truth from their God'. Allah is not unaware of what they do.
2.145	Those who were given the Book shall never follow your wisdom, even if you are to bring all the Signs before them; nor will you follow their rituals;  nor are some of them the followers of the rituals of others. And, after having received the wisdom of the Book, if you follow their vanities, certainly you will be among the unjust.(100)
2.146	To whoso We have given the Book, recognise it as they know their kindred. And indeed a group of them - they certainly hide the truth while they know.(101)
2.147	This is the truth from your God; so do not become of the doubtful.(102)
2.148	And for each one is His direction towards which he turns; and race to it for good; wherever that you will be, Allah will bring you all together. Indeed Allah has power over all things.(103)
2.149	And from wherever you start forth, turn your face towards the Sacred Ruh; verily, this is the truth from your God. Allah is not unaware of what you do.(104)
2.150   And from wherever you start forth, turn your face towards the Sacred Ruh; and so wherever you may be, turn your faces towards it - so that you give no chance to others except the evil ones amongst you to engage in vain arguments with you. So do not fear them; fear Me - so that you shall be blessed with My Grace; and guided aright.(105)
2.151	Likewise, We have sent amidst you a messenger from among you to make evident to you Our Signs, and to purify you; and, to teach you the Book and the Wisdom, and to enlighten you of that you never knew.(106)
2.152	"So remember Me, and I will remember you. And show your gratitude to Me, and reject Me not."(107)
2.153	O Believers! Seek patience in prayer (108); surely Allah is with the patient.
2.154	Never say 'dead' those who died in the path of Allah. Nay, are alive. You would not know it.(109)
2.155   And surely, We will test you with somewhat of fear and hunger; and from the losses of the fruits of your possessions and lives. And give glad tiding to the patient ones.(110)
2.156	When afflictions touch them, they say, "We indeed belong to Allah and certainly we return unto Him."
2.157	It is upon such of them,are their God's blessings and grace; and it is them who are guided.
2.158	Verily, 'Safa and Marwa (111) ' are among the Signs of Allah; so whoever undertakes the "Wish of the House (112) - Hajj of the House", it is no blame on him if he "repeatedly visits" and circumvents them both. And whoever has hearts for others, indeed then, Allah is Appreciative, Knowing.
2.159	Verily Allah curses those who conceal the clarity from Us, and the straight path We have made plain in the Book for the people; and, also are cursed by the cursing.(113)
2.160	Except those who repent and reform through clarity - I accept their repentance; I am the Acceptor of repentance, Most Merciful.(114)
2.161	Those who reject and die rejecting, upon them is the curse of Allah, the curse of the angels and that of all men.(115)
2.162   Abide therein forever - their sufferings will not be lessened nor will they be given the least chance.(116)
2.163	And your God is One God; there is no God but He, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.
2.164   Certainly in the creation of the skies and the earth, and in the changing night and day, and in the ships that sail on the sea bearing its use for men; and in Allah's sending down the rain from the sky wherewith giving life to the earth after it is dead; and, by which all kinds of animals are made to move freely - and, in the ever changing winds and in the clouds being suspended between the sky and the earth - therein are the signs for those who ponder.(117)
2.165   And there are those among them who set up beside Allah as His equal and show their piety to them as equally as they show devotion to Allah. But the believers are firm in their piety to Allah. And if only the unjust could see they will know how worse the punishment would be. All powers belong to Allah. Allah indeed is severe in punishment.(118)
2.166	When those whom they followed abandon those who followed - they would see their doom, and all their relationships would sever.(119)
2.167   And those who followed would say, "If we get another chance, we will abandon them as they abandoned us". Thus would Allah make their deeds cause them intense grief, and they are not to get out of the hellfire.(120)
2.168   O men, eat of that which are made lawful and right to you in the earth; and, guard against following the footsteps of Shaitan; and, he indeed is an open enemy to you.(121)
2.169	He induces you only to evil and indecent acts and makes you say of Allah that which you knew not.(122)
2.170   When it is said to them, "Follow that, what Allah has sent down on you", they say: Nay. We would only follow that wherein we found our forefathers. What, even though their forefathers had no understanding, nor were they guided?(123)
2.171	The parable to such disbelievers is like he who does not hear anything but one's cry and shout; they are deaf, dumb and blind. And they will not understand a thing.
2.172	O you who believe! Eat of the good provisions We have provided for you. And if it is Allah whom you obey, be grateful to Him.(124)
2.173	What is forbidden to you is that which is dead, and the blood, and the meat of pig and upon which other than Allah's names is pronounced. But there is no sin on him who is forced by necessity without willful disobedience or transgression. Surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.(125)
2.174	Those who hide what Allah has revealed in His Book and exchange it for the evil wealth, they indeed swallow into their bellies nothing but Fire. Allah will neither speak to them after that nor would He purify them. And to them is the painful torment.(126)
2.175   It is these who have bought the evil path for the Straightway, and the torment for the Forgiveness. What made them endure the Fire?
2.176	This is because verily, Allah has sent down the Book with the Truth; but certainly those who argue over the Truth, are in the deep divide.(127)
2.177   Piety is not facing east or west(128). But piety is submitting to Allah, believing in His Judgment Day, and the inhabitants of the sky, and the Book and the Prophets. And spending their wealth out of love for God - to the near ones, to the orphans, to the needy, to those on the straight path, to those who seek guidance and to release those under oppression. And, those who spend for their purity while being steadfast in the remembrance of Allah; and, those who when promise, honour their word. And the righteous are those who are enduring at times of adversities, anguish and hard-knocks. They are those who fear their God. 
2.178   O Believers! It is allowed avenging the murder - the free for the free (129); the slave for the slave (129), the woman for the woman (129) - yet, if he is forgiven by his brother (129). The murderer shall with gratitude and with dignity spend generously as compensation following what is in vogue; and, this is from your God as ease and mercy. And therefore, those who transgress even after this, for them is a punishment severe. 
2.179	O men of just, in avenging, there is life for you, that you shall fear God.
2.180   He who senses his death, and should he leave some goods behind him, it is mandatory he bequeaths it justifiably to his parents and near ones; and, it is incumbent upon those who fear.
2.181   After hearing, if anyone dares to change it, the sin thereof is upon them who change it. Surely Allah is Hearing, Knowing.
2.182	But if anyone sets right the will amicably, fearing a wrong or malice in it - there is no sin on him. Surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 
2.183	O Believers! Fasting is obligatory upon you as made upon those before you, so that you may purify.(130)
2.184   On occasions, particular! But if one is ill or on a journey, he shall fast on another instant. But if one finds fasting difficult, as compensation he shall give food to a needy; and if one on his own gives more, it is for his good - but fasting is best for you, if you did but know.
2.185   The occasions of Ramadhan (131) is: It is on such of these occasions, a man is shown the straight path from the verses of Quran, and, unveiled the clarity of its Signs -imparting him with the differentiating power. Therefore whosoever of you reaches such occasions, they shall, therein; but if anyone is ill or on a journey, he shall, on latter such instances. Allah wishes easiness for you and not difficulty. Fulfil on those occasions - to extol His Praise and to express your gratitude for having guided you to His Straight Path.
2.186   And when My bondmen (132) ask you regarding Me say: I am nigh; I am closest to him if he feels him to be nearest to Me, and remembers Me in the way he shall regard Me. May they feel secure with Me and believe in Me alone; then they will be on the right course.
2.187   It has ever been allowed privateness (133) with your spouses on the night of fasting; they are an adornment for you, and you are an adornment for them; Allah knows well while you secretly deceive yourselves. But by His Mercy, He has forgiven you - henceforth, shall have solace in your privacy with your spouses. And relish until the dawn breaks from the darkness of night; and, complete your fasting till the nightfall. Seclude ye from your spouses on such days when you wish reclusion in Allah's Remembrance and His Glorification. These are the limits set by Allah and do not transgress. Thus Allah makes His Signs evident to men that they may be God fearing.
2.188	Eat not up the properties of one another among yourselves by wrongful means and bribe not the executives to misappropriate the properties of others while you know.
2.189	They ask you concerning the phases of the moon (134). Say: They reveal to each concerning the reckoning of His Wish - the Hajj. It is not righteous to enter the houses from the back. The righteousness is fearing the God; so, enter the houses from the front door. Fear Allah that you will be successful.
2.190	Resist (135) in the path of Allah those who fight you, and do not transgress; Allah loves not the transgressors.
2.191	And wherever you face them,fell them, and drive them out from where they drove you out because causing mischief is worse than killing; yet, force not them unless and until they force them into the Masjid al haram- your houses where you keep off evil and praise God's purity. But if they transgress upon you, then you are to transgress upon them. Such is the recompense for the unjust.(136)
2.192	However if they cease, Allah indeed is Forgiving, Merciful.
2.193	Contend upfront against the oppression until justice is established in Allah's way. But if they give over, there shall not be enmity - except against the miscreants.
2.194   For the sacred period, is the term sanctified (137); likewise is the reward for all good deeds - then if anyone transgresses against you, transgress upon them in the measure they transgressed upon you; and, fear Allah. Verily, Allah is with those who fear Him.
2.195	And spend in the way (138) of Allah, and throw not into destruction with your hands; Do good (139). Allah is indeed with the good-doers. 
2.196   Complete the Hajj (140) and the Umra (141) for Allah. And if you are hindered - endure upon the Guidance, sacrificing your ease, as is possible. And lose not your heart (142) until the situation yields. However, if any of you is weak or ill at heart, the offset for them is fasting, being committed to truthfulness and forgoing the ease of your life for it, as a sacrifice. And when you regain peace, follow this Hajj up with - Greater Will and Determination, relinquishing your Ease further - The Umra; and if your endurance is weak, recompense it with a total of ten days' fasting - three, during the Hajj and seven on returning upon the Umra. That is for those whose hearts are not sacred for Allah - therefore fear Allah; and, know that Allah is severe in punishment.
2.197	The Hajj - a determined period. So whoever has set himself upon the journey to Hajj, let him guard against the disgraceful conduct, use of disrespectful words and talks of vanity. And Allah is ever watchful of every good deed that you do; safeguard the provisions of honour. And surely, the best of all honour is to fear God. So men of wisdom, fear only Me.(143)
2.198	There is no sin in seeking your God's Wish; and, if you leave with His lofty grace, remember Allah with gratitude and magnanimity; remember Him as if He had established you in the righteousness; verily, you were among the misguided, earlier.(144)
2.199	Then, bestow upon the others what is bestowed upon you; seek forgiveness (145) from Allah. Verily, Allah is Most Forgiving, Most Merciful.
2.200	Thus when His Will and your Wish - the Hajj completes with His Holiness, remember Allah as you remember your father or with even greater reverence. And some of the people say: "O God, give us all the worldly pleasures!" For them, there is no grant in the Hereafter.
2.201	And there are some who say: "O our God, give us the good in this world, and the good in the Hereafter. And save us from the punishment of fire."
2.202	Such of them - for them are the blessings upon what they earned. And Allah is swift in accounting.(146)
2.203   Remember Allah more during the waiting period; if any one hastens in two days, no sin on him; and no sin on he who saves it for a later time; for those who fear - Fear Allah. And know that you will all be gathered unto Him.(147)
2.204	There is one such among men - his utterances would surprise you; he would even invoke Allah's witness to project his soul. He is the wicked enemy.(148)
2.205	When he returns, he would be hell bent to cause mischief on the earth; and, would try to destroy the tilth and spill the blood. Allah does not love devilry.(149)
2.206	When it is said to him, "Fear Allah!" His arrogance forces him further into madness. Hell would suffice him. Certainly, it is the worst of all evil abodes.	
2.207	And among men are they who sacrifice them for the pleasure of Allah; and, Allah is ever Kind to the obedient.(150)
2.208	O Believers! Incline wholesomely toward Peace, and follow not the footsteps of Shaitan. Surely he is your open enemy.(151)
2.209	If you slide back after the clear signs have come to you - know that Allah is All Powerful, All Knowing.(152)
2.210	Do they expect anything else but that Allah and the angels cloud them and swipe their affairs away? And all their matters shall be brought before Him.(153)
2.211	Say to the descendants of Israel, "How many a clear sign have we sent to them? Allah is severe in punishment against those who change His grace after it has come to them.(154)
2.212	To the rejecters this life is made beautiful; so they mock the believers. But those who fear God would gracefully be placed High above them in the end; and, Allah would endlessly bestow upon whom He will.(155)
2.213   Mankind was Created as One(156). Allah sent the prophets as bringers of glad tidings and as warners, and also with them, He sent the Book(157) in truth to settle the disputes among the men. But those who were in the know thereof differed with the truth, after clear signs came to them, due to envy amongst them. However, Allah showed the straight path by His command, guiding the believers in Him towards the Truth(158) wherein they denied and differed; such is the way Allah guides those whom He will. 
2.214	Or do you think you would reach the heaven while that which came upon those who passed away before you, has not come to you yet? Hardships and afflictions seized them. The messenger and those who believed with him were so shaken up that they cried and said, "When is the help from Allah?" "Verily, Allah's help is close."(159)
2.215	They ask you concerning what they shall spend. Say, " Whatever you spend of the good, spend it for your parents, the dear relations, the orphans, the needy and those in the path of righteousness; and, certainly Allah knows well any righteous deed that you do.(160)
2.216   The Just War (161) - though it is contemptible to you it is made mandatory for you. You may hate one, but it may be good for you; you may like one, but it may be evil for you. Allah knows, and you know not.
2.217   They ask you concerning altercations during 'The Peaceful Times'. Say, "To engage in the quarrel during peaceful moments is a grievous crime. But even worse before Allah is the crime that you should hinder one in the path of Allah, and in denial of Him; and, entering into, and causing hindrance to the people of the Houses wherein they glorify God's Purity; and, driving the people of the Houses away from there. Mischief is worse than killing. If they can, they will not stop fighting their unjust war on you, until they make you turn away from your straight path. And if any of you turns away from His straight path and dies as a rejector, all his good rewards in this world and the world next would be lost. They, as the dwellers of hell, shall abide in the fire forever."
2.218	The believers and those who have abandoned their homes in the way of Allah, and those who engaged in the just war most certainly expect the grace of Allah. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
2.219	They ask you about the intoxicants and gambling. Say, "In them are great sins - and for man, there is an element of usage in it; but, the evil in them is far worse than the benefits in it. They ask you, "What to spend?" Say, "Spend that which is beyond the need." Allah thus explains the Signs so that you may ponder.
2.220	From this day, till the end they ask you concerning the orphans. Say, "It is best to set right their affairs; and if you happen to live together, they are your kindred; and, Allah knows the corrupter from the mender. Had Allah willed, He would have pushed you into distress. Verily, Allah is Mighty, Wise. 
2.221	And do not marry the associating women until they become believers; however charming the associating woman is, the one who does not associate and in total submission to God is surely better than her. And it is the same with the men - get them not into marriage until they become believers; however handsome the associating man is, the one who does not associate and in total submission to God is surely better than him. They call you unto hellfire. But Allah by His mercy calls you unto the Heaven and Forgiveness. He makes clear His Signs to men haply they may give thought.
2.222   And they ask you concerning menstruation. Say, "It is annoying; so, stay clear of women during menstruation. And do not get near to them until they are comfortable; and, when they feel clean and comfortable go to them in the manner Allah would appreciate; Allah loves those who repent, and loves those who are fair. 
2.223	Your women - are your solace. So seek (162) them wishing your solace; fear Allah and send forth for your good; and, know that you will meet Him. Give this as a glad tiding to the believers.
2.224   And because you promise in the Name of Allah - do not block His help in your good deeds, your God-fearing nature and in bringing peace among men. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.(163)
2.225	Allah will not hold you guilty for your light talks, but He will hold you guilty for what your hearts have willfully earned. And Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing.(164)
2.226	Those who forswear their wives have a respite of four months; if they get back, then Allah is surely Forgiving, Merciful.(165)
2.227	But if they decide upon divorce, Allah indeed is Hearing, Knowing.(166)
2.228   Women who were divorced shall wait for the completion of three menstrual cycles; if they believe in Allah and the Last day, it is not lawful for them to conceal what Allah had created in their wombs. If the husbands of the women wish reconciliation, they are more privileged to return (167). As the husbands' privilege upon the women, upon them is the privilege of the women too. However, men are a degree above them. And Allah is Mighty, Wise.
2.229	Divorce is allowed only twice - Guard it beautifully; or get freed peacefully, and this, only if both of them fear they cannot safeguard the limits set by Allah - and, you cannot take back anything that which you had given to your wives. But if you fear they cannot safeguard the limits of Allah there is no sin on her ransoming a part thereof. That is the ordainment of Allah and do not transgress it; and, whoever transgresses he is the wrong-doer. 
2.230	Then if he again divorces her, he cannot marry her again; but if she marries another man and the latter husband too divorces her - and, even after this he is committed to re-unite by safeguarding the limits of Allah, there is no blame on them to come to terms.  That is the ordainment of Allah. Allah makes plain to those who understand. 
2.231   If you divorce take them back before the waiting period is over; or, if they complete their waiting period, retain them in kindness, or separate from them in a beautiful manner; distress them not keeping them captive; and, transgress not on them; should he violate he harms himself. Therefore do not take Allah's guidance for fun. Remember all that Allah had bestowed upon you, and the Book He had sent down to you, and the wisdom He had given you - thus He delivers you the good news; fear Allah. And know that Allah surely encompasses all.  
2.232	And when you divorce women and if they completed their waiting period, do not obstruct their marriage with whom they choose to live. It is a reminder to those who believe in Allah and the Last day. That is for your quality, pure. Allah knows, and you know not.(168)
2.233   If mothers wish to breastfeed their children they shall feed for two whole years. It is for the father to arrange clothing and the provisions in a seemly manner to the nursing mother; none shall force any beyond their scope; the mother, of her child, shall not be put to stress; nor would the father, of his child, put to harm. Likewise it is incumbent upon the heirs; if they both agree upon the weaning, it is no blame on either of them; instead, if you prefer a foster mother to feed your children it is no blame on you. But fulfil your duty to them respectfully; and, fear God. And know that Allah is surely a Seer of what you do.
2.234	If any of you dies, the waiting period for the wife is four months and ten days; and, there is no blame on you if they set right their life affair in a fair manner, after completing their waiting period; Allah is Well Aware of all you do.(169)
2.235	It is not a sin to make an indirect proposal of marriage to the woman or conceal it in your hearts; Allah knows you love them; but do not give them promises secretly, but still, you can follow such ways prevailing in practice. And do not ascertain the marriage proposal until the waiting period is completed. Fear Him, as Allah surely knows what you have in your hearts. And know that Allah is surely Forgiving, Most Tolerant.(170)
2.236   There is no blame on you if you divorce women before touching them or before fixing their dower. But give them a just portion of it, i.e., the rich man according to his richness and the poor according to his means, a fair provision. That is a bounden duty upon the righteous.(171)
2.237	But if you divorce the women before touching them but after fixing the dower, then half the portion of the dowry belongs to the women - except the women or in whose hands the responsibility of the marriage rests forgoes you; to forgo is nearer to piety. And forget not the kind benevolence between you. Surely Allah is Seer of what you do.(172)
2.238	Guard ye in Prayerfulness (173); adhere ye in thy submission only to Allah(174), and stand steadfast in His Faith (175). 
2.239	Still if you fear, set out on foot or in vehicles(176) - and when you are secure (176), remember Allah as He has taught you (176) that which you knew not.
2.240   If those of you who are about to die, leaving wives, they shall bequeath for their wives a year of provisions and shelter without expulsion. But there is no blame on you if the women, by themselves leave the house after honourably securing their lives. Allah is All-Powerful, All-Knowing.(177)
2.241	And further, the divorced women have the right to a fair provision and maintenance. It is the duty upon those who fear Allah.(178)
2.242	Allah thus makes clear His Signs haply you may ponder.
2.243   Did you not see those who emigrated in thousands fearing their lives? Allah said to them, "Die!" Then He brought them back to life. Surely Allah possesses abundance for humanity. But most people are not thankful.(179)
2.244	Strive in the path of Allah and know that surely Allah is the Hearing, the Knowing.
2.245	Whosoever lends a beautiful loan to Allah He would multiply it and make it manifold. Allah restricts, and expands; and, you are to return to Him.(180)
2.246   After Musa, did you not notice the leaders of the people of Israel? When they said to their Prophet, "Appoint for us a king to fight in Allah's Way", he said, "If fighting is ordained upon you, would you sit back?" To this, they said, "What is wrong with us that we shall not fight them in Allah's path when we were driven away from our homes and our people?" But when they were commanded to fight, except for a few among them, most turned back. Allah knows well the unjust.(181)
2.247   Their prophet said to them: "Surely Allah has sent Talut as your King. They said, "How could he have command over us? Rather we are superior to him, and he does not have the bestow with abundance." To this, he said, "Allah has chosen him over you, and He has given him a greater willpower, and endurance. Allah grants His power of command to whom He will. And Allah is Expansive, All Encompassing.(182)
2.248   And their prophet said to them, "Indeed as a Sign of His kingship, an Ark will come to you, and in it is the peace for you from your God. It will bear the remnants of the family of Musa and the family of Harun - and, the angels would carry it; if you are believers, in it indeed is the portent for you. 
2.249	Then when Talut set forth with his forces he said, "Verily Allah will test you with a river; those who drink thereof are not of me; but those who have not tasted of it except for a handful, they are of me." But for a few drank from it. And when Talut and those who believed with him did cross the river, they said: "This day we have no strength to fight Jalut and his forces." But those who were sure, 'We will certainly meet with Allah', said: "How many a small force have won over the greater forces by the leave of Allah; and, Allah is with those who are patient."
2.250	And when they advanced into the field to face Jalut and his forces, they said: "Our God, bestow patience upon us, and make our foothold firm and help us against the disbelieving people." (183)
2.251   Thus they defeated the army of Jalut by the leave of Allah. Dawud killed Jalut, and Allah gave him the Kingdom and Wisdom; and taught him all that He wished for him. Had not Allah checked a group with another group there would be great tumult on the land; surely Allah is full of grace upon the people of the worlds.(184)
2.252	These are the Signs of Allah; We certainly reveal to you in truth; and, indeed you are of the messengers.
2.253   Those messengers - We have raised some in degrees above some, and Allah has spoken with some of them, and He has raised some among them higher in ranks. And We gave clear signs to Esa, son of Maryam, and we helped him through Ruh-ul-Quddus (185). Had Allah willed, those who came after those messengers would not have been fighting among themselves even after the clear signs had come unto them. But they differed; among them are the believers, and among them are the rejecters. Had Allah willed they would not have been fighting. But Allah does what He will. 
2.254	O Believers! Spend of what We have given you before the day arrives when there is no bargaining, nor friendliness, nor intercession. And those who are denying - they are the evil ones.
2.255   Allah - there is no God but He. He is the Source of Life and the Source of Eternity. Neither slumber nor deep sleep would ever touch Him; everything in the heavens, and in the world belongs to Him. Who could intercede with Him without His leave? And He knows what is before them and what is after them; without His leave, none shall understand anything of His wisdom. The expanse of His Throne is spread out in the heavens, and in the world, and it is not hard for Him to protect them both. He is Sublime, the MostHigh.(186)
2.256	There is no force in the righteousness, for the straight path has become plainly evident from the evil ways; therefore, whoever rejects the evil ways and believes in Allah, has surely held a fast hold on to the strongest rope of Allah that will never break. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.(187)
2.257	Allah is the Saviour for those who believe; he delivers them to the light from the darknesses. But for the rejecters shaitans are their protectors; they rush them from the light into darknesses; they are the dwellers of hell, and they will abide therein forever.(188)
2.258	Did you notice the one who argued with Ibrahim about his God on account of the kingship Allah gave him? Said Ibrahim, "My God is the One who gives life, and brings death." To this, he said, "I too give life and cause death." Ibrahim said, "Certainly my God causes the sun to rise in the east; you make it rise in the west." The denier that he is did not find the answer. And Allah does not show any way to the wrongdoers.(189)
2.259	Or, like the one who passed by a village in total wreckage - he said, "How does Allah bring life to this village after its death?" As an answer, Allah made him die for a hundred years and then raising him to life, He said to him, "How long have you tarried?" He said, "For a day or a part of the day." He said, "Nay, you were here for a hundred years! Look here! Your food and your drink - years have not passed over them; but, see your donkey - this is sure to make you a Sign unto your people. See its bones and how we assemble them and how we cover it with the muscles and skin." And when it was manifest to him, he said: "I have known Allah indeed has power over all things."(190)
2.260	And when Ibrahim said, "My God, show me how You bring life to the dead." He said, "Do you not believe?" Said he, "Certainly I do, but to soothe my soul." "Catch and train four among the birds; then place each of their parts in each mountain; then command them to you; they would at once come flying to you." And know that Allah is Mighty, Wise.(191)
2.261	The parable to those who spend their wealth in the path of Allah is that of a seed that shoots of seven ears, each one bearing a hundred grains; Allah multiplies it to whom He will. Allah is Ever Expansive, All Encompassing.(192)
2.262	Those who after spending in Allah's path refrains from publicising it and restrains from disgracing the beneficiary, their goodly reward is with their God; and, they shall neither fear nor grieve.(193)
2.263	Kind words and forgiveness are even better deeds than disgracing the beneficiary of the charity. Allah is Needless, Forbearing.(194)
2.264   O Believers, spoil not your charity like him who spends his wealth as a show to the people, and then who follows it with insult and disgrace to the beneficiary without believing in Allah and the Day of Reckoning. The parable to him is the bald rock upon which has settled, the dust; and, it is wiped out by the down pouring of incessant rain; likewise, they avail not ought from what they do. And, Allah does not Guide those who reject the straight path.(195)
2.265	And the parable to those who spend their wealth seeking Allah's satisfaction and for their steadfastness are that of a garden on high ground. Torrents downpour on it; then its produces multiply; or, even when there is no downpour, drizzles suffice it. Allah is the Seer of all that you do.(196)
2.266	Would any of you desire this? - That in his possession is a garden of dates and grapevines beneath which rivers flow; and, in it is every kind of fruit, then old age smites him, and with him are his offspring of tender age; at this state, a fiery whirlwind burns them all out. Allah makes His Signs clear that you may ponder.(197)
2.267   O Believers, spend that which is worthy of what you had gained and of what We have brought forth for you from the earth; and, seek not the musty things to spend some thereof - for you would not receive them but with hate. And know that surely Allah is Needless, Praiseworthy.(198)
2.268	Shaitan causes fear of straitness and bids you into indecency, but Allah promises from Him Forgiveness and Grand gift; and, Allah is the Expansive, All-Knowing.(199)
2.269	He gives Wisdom to whom He will. Whoever is given the wisdom, surely is granted with absoluteness. None gives a thought to it except the wise.(200)
2.270	And whatever be your help or the vow you make, surely Allah knows it well, and for the wrong-doers, there are no helpers.(201)
2.271	It is nice if your charity is made known, but it is even better for you if you make it benefit the recipients secretly; that it will also remove your sins. And Allah knows what you do.(202)
 2.272	And it is not binding on you that you guide them, but Allah guides whom He will. And it is good for you whatever best you do in your deeds, and seek not in spending aught but the satisfaction of Allah; and, whatever you spend of the good, its fruits will be returned to you in full. And you will not be wronged.(203)
2.273   It befits only those who endure in the path of Allah and who are put to straits; those who see their virtuosity very outwardly think they are rich. But you may identify them by their signs; they will not seek men as charity; and, whatever good things you do, Allah indeed knows them well. 
2.274	Those who spend their wealth in the night and day, both secretly and openly, their goodly reward is with their God. They shall have neither fear nor do they grieve.
2.275   Those who swallow the usury will not rise except like the one, smitten by Shaitan into madness; this is because they said: "Trade is similar to banking." But Allah has made the trade lawful while forbidding usury as sinful; even so, whoever leaves it after the admonition has come to him from his God, lawful it is to him whatever he had earned before, but his deed is with Allah. And those who turn back, they are the dwellers of hell, and they will abide therein forever.(204)
2.276	Allah will destroy usury and make charity flourish; and, Allah does not love the sinful rejecters.  
2.277	Those who believe, and who remain in His glad tidings, and stand firm ever in charity, and in Allah's remembrance - for them their reward is with their God. They shall neither fear nor grieve.(205)
2.278   O Believers, if you are truthful that you fear Allah, then leave the rest of the usury.(206)
2.279   If you do not do this, then the command from Allah and His messenger is, 'the just war'. If you repent then you have your principal; wrong not, and there is no wronging on you.(207)
2.280	And if the debtor is in hardship, wait until his situation eases to comfort; but if you waive it, it is charity - the best for you if you know.
2.281	And fear that day - On that day you will all be returned to Allah; then each will be recompensed in full for what he has earned. And they will not be wronged in their recompense.
2.282	O believers make properly signed the document on the period fixed, in your trade agreements. Let the scribe write it justly; and, let not the writer deny helping. He shall serve in the way Allah has guided him; and, let the indebted himself read his document and let him fear his God; adjust or alter not anything in it. But if the indebted cannot read, or he is ill, or he cannot say because of his weakness, let the guardian of his interests read it for him righteously. Further, make two of your men as witnesses; if you do not find two men, then choose one from among the witnessing men whom you find worthy - and two from among the witnessing women. That is because if one remains back, the other shall remind; and, when the witnesses are called for, they shall not deny whether it is smaller or bigger - you shall not be careless in writing them with its term of period. And this is equitable before Allah and a sure testimony, and the best way to avoid suspicions between you. But if it is circulating and current money in your trade, it is no sin for you had you not documented it. But when you make agreements keep the witnesses; and, you shall not coerce the writer or the witness. If you do so is sin on you - fear Allah. Because it is Allah, who Guides you. And, Allah is Knower of all things.
2.283	And while you are on travel - if you do not find the writer, you may have some surety, and upon a mutual trust that with whoever is the surety entrusted, he shall return it on demand and may he fear Allah, his God. And you shall not hide the witness - and whosoever hides it, verily his heart is sinful. And Allah knows all that you do.
2.284	Everything in the skies and the earth belongs to Allah; and, Allah will question you regarding that which you hide in your hearts, and that which you speak out; and, He forgives whom He will and punishes whom He will. Allah has power over all things.
2.285	The Messenger. He believes that with which he has been graced - similarly, do the believers believe in Allah, in His angels, in His Books and His messengers; and, they say, "We shall not differentiate any messenger from the other messengers. We have heard, and we have surrendered. Our God! We seek forgiveness from You, and our return is only unto You."
2.286	Allah does not put to the test anyone beyond his sweep; whatever good fortune he earned is his; and, whatever misfortune he earned is his. "Our God! Whether we have forgotten or we have committed, hold us not accountable. Our God! Burden us not with a trial as that with which you tried our ancestors; burden us not with difficulty beyond our scope; forbear our sins, and forgive us. And bless us with Mercy. You are our Protector! Help us against people, denying."


                Chapter 3
Al Imran

3.1	Alif, Laam, Meem - A L M(208)
3.2	Allah - there is no God but He; He is the Source of Life, the Eternal.
3.3	It is He who sent you the Book in Truth, confirming that were sent before; and, it is He who sent down the Taurat and the Injeel.    
3.4    	Before this, to guide the humankind, He sent down the Book that gives the distinction. So whoever rejects the Signs of Allah, verily for them is the torment severe. Allah is the Mighty, the Avenging.
3.5	Verily from Allah, nothing is hidden in the skies or on the earth.
3.6	It is He who perfects your creation in the wombs as His Will. There is no God to call upon but He. He is the Mighty, the Wise.(209)
3.7    	It is He who sent down the Book to you. In it are the verses of Wisdom(210) transparent, that makes the Essence(210) of the Book; and, from that, the hidden meanings spring forth. However, in who soever's hearts is the crookedness, they choose the meanings that suit their mischief. No one has the application of the sense of it, but Allah; and, upon whoever has He endowed the knowledge will say, "All of it is from our God, and we believe in it." Except for men of understanding, none will receive the Message.
3.8	Our God! Let not our hearts stray, after You have guided us; bestow upon us of Your mercy; verily, You are the Most Benevolent.(211)
3.9    	Our God! Surely You are to gather all humanity on a day, doubtless. Indeed, Allah will not fail in His Promise.
3.10	Those who reject faith, their wealth and children surely will not halt aught from Allah; and, they are the fuels of fire.
3.11	Like that of the people of Firaun and those before them - they belied Our Signs; henceforth, Allah seized them for their sins. And Allah is severe in punishment.(212)
3.12	Say to the deniers: "You shall soon face defeat and be gathered in hell, an evil resting place."
3.13	Verily, therein is the Sign for you in the two armies that met; one, fought in the path of Allah, and the other was disbelieving. The disbelievers saw with their eyes, the army of Allah as twice the strength of their own; and, Allah helps with His succour whom He will. Surely in it is the Sign for those with insight. 
3.14	Women, sons, the stores of heaped up gold and silver, branded horses, the wealth of cattle and well-tilled land - are made sources of beauty to the humankind, which they desire. They are the mean provisions of the world. But abode with Allah has the Best of Returns.(213)
3.15	Say: Shall I say a better prospect than all of them? The piety. Those who fear their God - for them with their God are the paradises, beneath which rivers flow, and they will abide therein forever; and, for them are the companions pure, and the pleasure of Allah. And Allah is ever watchful of His bondmen.
3.16	They would say: "Our God, surely we believed; forgive us our sins, and save us from the punishment of fire."(214)
3.17	They are the enduring, the truthful, the steadfast, spending good and are seeking forgiveness during the early hours.
3.18    	Allah, while upon the justice and as the witness say, "There is none to call upon except He." And so are the inhabitants of the skies and those in clarity - "There is none to serve except He." He is the Mighty, the Wise.
3.19	Verily, the way with Allah is Peace! Those who were given the Book, differed from the Way only after the Clear Signs had come to them, due to envy with one another. And those who denied the Way of Allah, indeed, Allah is swift in calling to account. 
3.20    	Then, if they dispute with you, say: "I only follow Allah, and also those who come to me; and, say to those who have the knowledge and the innocents: "Do you follow as well?" If they follow too, surely, they have attained the straight path. But if they turn away, then your duty is to announce. And Allah is ever watchful of His bondmen.(215)
3.21	Give glad tidings and say: Verily, those who keep denying the Signs of Allah, and unjustly killing the prophets (216) - and, also killing those who inspire the people with justice - to them is a torment painful.        
3.22	All their works have become void this day, until the end; and, they have no helpers.    
3.23    	Beheld not ye - those to whom We had given a part of the Signs of the Book? They are called to the justice with the wisdom of Allah; but, a party of them turns away, in aversion.(217)
3.24    	The reason is that they keep saying: "Hellfire for us is not eternal but for a few days." And the lie they forged, had deceived them all their lives.(218)
3.25	How will it be on the Day of no doubt, when We gather them all to deliver them the justice in full for what they had earned? And they will not be wronged. 
3.26	Say: "O Allah! The King of kingdoms! You give the Kingdom to whom You will, and You remove the kingdom from who You will. And You dignify whom You will, and You disgrace whom You will. All the good is in Your hands; and, You have power over all things. 
3.27    	"You cause the night enter into the day, and You cause the day enter into the night; and, You bring forth the living from the dead, and You bring forth the dead from the living. And You provide in abundance to whom You will." 
3.28    	Let not the believers prefer the disbelievers to the believers of their likes as guides. Except for that, they did so out of fear, and only to protect them from them, there is no help from Allah. However, Allah warns about Him, that your return is unto Him. 
3.29	Say: "Allah knows well whether you hide what is in your breasts or openly say it; and, He knows what is in the skies and what is on the earth. Allah has power over all things."
3.30	And to each, on that Day - when his good deeds and evil works are brought, he would desire that there should be a long distance between him and his wrongs; and, Allah warns about Him. Allah is full of Mercy upon His bondmen.
3.31	Say: "If you wish Allah's love upon you, follow me. Allah will love you; He will forgive you your sins. And Allah is Ever Forgiving, the Merciful.
3.32	Say: "Be obedient to Allah and His Messenger." If they disobey and turn away - Verily, Allah does not love the disobedient.
3.33	Adam and Nuh, and the descendants of Ibrahim, and the descendants of Imran - Allah indeed has chosen them the foremost over the people of all the worlds.(219)
3.34	One, is the descendant of another - and Allah is Hearing, Knowing.(220)
3.35	The wife of Imran said, "My God, I certainly vow to dedicate to You that which is in my womb; so, accept from me. Certainly, You are the Hearer, the Knower.(221)
3.36    	And remember when she delivered, said: "My God, I gave birth to only a female child" - Allah knows well what she had delivered. "Male is not like the female!" "I have christened her 'Maryam'. And I seek refuge in You for her, and for her descendants from the accursed Shaitan."(222)
3.37	Her God has graciously accepted her prayer and vouchsafed her a goodly growth; and, He gave the child a dignified upbringing under Zachariah - And whenever Zachariah visited her room, he found it to be comfortable with every provision for her. He said, "O Maryam, wherefrom is this to you?" She said, "It is from Allah; and, surely Allah provides without measure to whom He is pleased with."(223)
3.38	At that very instance Zachariah invoked His God and said, "My God, Bestow me with a Pure progeny from you; You are indeed the Hearer of Prayer."(224)
3.39	When he was in his chamber in oneness with his God - The angels called on him and said in a clear tone, "Verily, Allah blesses you with 'Yahya!' And he will be a testimony to the words of Allah, and will be merciful, and with a pleasingly good conduct and will be a prophet from among the good."(225)
3.40	"God", said he: "How can I have a son? I am old, and my wife is sterile" - to this He said: Thus! Allah does what He wills.(226)
3.41	He said, "My God, show me a sign!" He said, "The Sign for you is: for three days you will not speak to the people but with the signs. And glorify your God, remembering Him, morning and evening.(227)
3.42	The angels: "O Maryam, verily Allah has chosen you, and has guarded you pure; and, has chosen you over all the women of the world. 
3.43	O Maryam obey your God and surrender to Him, and be humble with those who are humble. 
3.44    	These are the secrets, and We reveal it to your insight. And, you were not with them when it is decided in writing, concerning under whose guardianship shall Maryam stay, nor were you with them while they disputed it.(228)
3.45	The angels said: "O Maryam! Allah indeed gives you glad tiding through a word from Him; his name is Isa, son of Maryam. He will be among the honoured and the nearer ones, both in this world and in the hereafter.
3.46	"And he will speak to the people while in the cradle and when he comes of age; and, he will be among the enlightened."
3.47	Said she, "My God, when no man ever touched me, how can I have a son?" He said: Thus! Allah creates what He will; and, when He intends a creation, He says to it, 'Be!' And it is!
3.48	And He will teach him the Book and the Wisdom and Taurat and Injeel.
3.49	And as a Messenger to the people of Israel: "I have come to you indeed, from your God with a Sign. I will fashion for you out of clay in the form of a bird and breathe into it, and by Allah's leave, it will become a bird. And I will cure the born-blind and lepers; and, by Allah's leave I will bring the dead alive. And, I will disclose what you eat and what you store up in your houses. Indeed, in these are the surest Signs for you, if you are believers in the verses of Allah."
3.50	"And to testify the Taurat before me; and, I have brought you a Sign from your God to make agreeable to you certain of the things forbidden; so fear Allah and obey me."
3.51	Verily, Allah is my God and your God - So obey Him. This is the straight path. 
3.52	When Isa sensed in them the denial, he said: "Who will help me in the path of Allah. Those who followed Isa said, "We are helpers for Allah; and assuredly we believe in Allah; and, bear witness, we are at peace with Him." 
3.53	"O our God! We believe in what You have sent down and follow this messenger; and, write us down among the witnesses."
3.54	They plotted - Allah too laid out, and Allah is the Best of Planners.
3.55	And remember when Allah said: "O Isa, I will certainly preserve you and raise you unto Me; I will purify you from the deniers. And I will keep those who follow you above the deniers until the Last Day. Then your return is unto Me. And I will judge between you regarding that which you have been disputing."
3.56	So I will punish those who deny, with a severe punishment, both in this world and on the Last Day. And they will find no helpers to them. 
3.57	But those who believe and do good, He will grant them with a goodly reward. And Allah does not love the unjust. 
3.58	What We reveal to you of the Signs are of the reminiscence of Wisdom.(229)
3.59	Verily with Allah, the parable of Isa is the parable of Adam. He designed him from the earth and said to it, "Be!" and he became.(230)
3.60	What has come from your God is the Truth; and, so become not of the doubtful.  
3.61      So, after the full knowledge has come to you regarding this, if any one disputes with you, then say: "Come! Let us gather our sons and your sons; our women and your women; and ourselves and yourselves - and invoke the curse of Allah upon the liars."(231)
3.62	Assuredly, this is the narration, true. There is no narrator, but the Narrator, Allah. Verily Allah - He is Mighty, All Knowing.(232)
3.63	If they turn away, Allah surely knows well the mischievous ones.
3.64	Say: O the people of the Book (233)! Let us settle upon the point of peace between us and you! That we will not obey anything but Allah; and that we will not associate anyone to Allah; and that some among us will not take some among us as gods other than Allah. If they turn away, then say: "You shall bear witness - we are Muslims.
3.65	"O people of the Book (234), why do you dispute concerning Ibrahim? It is that Taurat and Injeel were not sent down, but after him; have you not understood then?"           
3.66	Know that you disputed on things about which you had a little knowledge; why then do you engage in an argument over things about which you have no knowledge at all? Allah is the Knower; you know not.
3.67	Ibrahim was neither a Jew nor a Christian; but, he was wishful of the 'Guidance and Peace from Allah'. And he was not of the polytheists.(235)
3.68	Closer to Ibrahim among men indeed are those who followed him, and this prophet and those who believed; and, Allah is the guardian for the believers.(236)
3.69	"Of the people of the Book (237) is a party that tries to deviate you from righteousness; but, they cannot deviate but themselves - yet, they will not understand.
3.70	O people of the Book (238), how will you belie the Signs of Allah, while you bear witness yourselves?
3.71	"O people of the Book (239), why do you mix the Truth with the Lie? And why do you hide the Truth, knowingly?" 
3.72    	A party of people of the Book (240) says to you: "Believe in the morning and reject in the evening that which is revealed to the believers; so, they too might turn away."  
3.73	"Do not trust anyone except those who are of you." Say: "Surely the straight path is the path of Allah." "What, that anyone should be given the like of that you are bestowed? Or is it that they should gain over you, before your deities?" Say: "Truly, the benevolence is only in the hands of Allah. He grants it to whom He will; Allah is All Encompassing, All Knowing." 
3.74	And by His grace He takes close to Him whom He will. And Allah is Most Merciful.(241)
3.75    	And among the people of the Book (242) is he, who would give back to you even if you had entrusted them with a heap of gold. And there is he among them who would not give back a penny, of what you had entrusted with them unless you stand persistently at their doors, asking for it. It is because they say, "Ciphers have no authority over us!" And they wittingly lie against Allah.
3.76	It is not so. who so fulfils a promise for fear of Allah, verily, Allah loves those who fear.
3.77    	Those who exchange their agreement with Allah and their words of promise for a mean price, for them indeed, in the end, is not the least portion; and not will Allah speak to them, nor will He even look at them on the Hour, Lasting. Neither will He purify them, and for them is the punishment severe.(243) 
3.78	Surely among them is a section - they twist the Truth as they narrate, to make you believe that it is part of the Book; but it is not of the Book. And they say it is from Allah, but it is not from Allah. And they throw lies against Allah, wittingly.
3.79	When Allah has given a man the Book, the Wisdom and the Prophet hood, it does not befit him to say to the people, "Become my slaves leaving Allah!" However, he would say, "If you recite and rehearse and know of the Signs of the Book, then lean on to your God wholesomely."(244)
3.80	And he would not say: "Take the angels and the prophets as lords." Will he say, "Become deniers after having attained Peace, by God?"
3.81    	And when the Prophets indeed took the oath before Allah, and then, said: "I have given you the Wisdom of the Book; then, after me, a Messenger will come to you confirming the wisdom I have given you;. You put your trust in him and help him resolutely - so, will you conform and stay committed to this oath?" They said, "We confirm!" Then the Prophet said: "You bear witness, and I am with you among the witnesses." (245)
3.82	So, despite this, if anyone turns away, they are evil indeed.(246)
3.83	Do they wish other than Allah's straight path? All in the heavens and on the earth surrender to Him, willingly or unwillingly. And, their return is unto Him.(247)
3.84	Say: We believe in Allah and what has been endowed upon us (248); and, what has been revealed to Ibrahim, Ismail, Ishaq and Yaqub, and their descendants; and, in what was sent down upon Musa, Isa and other Prophets from their God. And we will not differentiate anyone from among them. And we are Muslims unto Him.
3.85    	And if anyone opts for life against 'Peace', it will never be accepted from him, and in the end, he will be among the losers.  
3.86	How will Allah help a community, which denied after believing, and bearing witness to the Truth of the Messenger through the clear Signs that had come to them? Allah does not guide the unjust.
3.87	Surely, their due recompense is the curse of Allah, of the inhabitants of the skies and from all men.
3.88	Therein is their abode forever; their torment will not be lessened nor would it be delayed.
3.89	Except he who repents and mends, Allah indeed is Most Forgiving, Most Merciful.
3.90	Those who believed and then denied; and then, increased in their denial - surely their penitence will not be accepted. They are the ones astray.
3.91	Verily, those who disbelieve and die in disbelief, even if he ransoms him with the earth full of gold, it will not be accepted from any one of them. For them is a painful doom, and they will find no helpers for them.(249)
3.92	Until you spend out of what you like most, you will not gain righteousness, and Allah knows very well about whatever you spend.
3.93	Before the Taurat was sent to the Israelites; they had forbidden themselves despite all kinds of foods, then, were lawful to them. Say: If you are truthful reveal from the Taurat.
3.94	After this, if anyone forges a lie on Allah, they are unjust indeed.
3.95	Say, "Allah tells the Truth; follow only the straight path of Ibrahim; he was not among those who associate."(250)
3.96	In 'Bacca' is the prime-most living place for humanity; it is a noble and a guiding force for the people of all worlds.(251)
3.97	In it is the intuitive perceptiveness, the firmest standpoint of Ibrahim; and, whoever enters this path is well preserved; and it is the bounden duty of the humankind to wish for this House, to his ability. If anyone rejects this - then, surely Allah is needless of the peoples of the worlds.
3.98	Say, "O people of the Book (252)! Why do you reject the intuition from Allah, while Allah is the keen watcher over all that you do?" 
3.99	Say, "O people of the Book (252)! Why do you obstruct the path of the believers? Do you desire to deviate it while you bear witness? And Allah is not unwatchful of what you do."
3.100	O believers! If you were ever to follow a section of the people of the Book, they would turn you to disbelief after you have believed.
3.101	How will you deny while His messenger is with you and revealing to you the Signs of Allah? And whoever holds a firm grip on Allah, had indeed been guided into the straight path.
3.102 	O believers! Fear Allah as you shall fear, and never shall you die except while you are in peace with Allah - as Muslims.
3.103 	And stand firm altogether in the path of Allah, and break not up into sections (253); and, remember His grace upon you when you were enemies. Then, by His grace, He joined all your hearts with love, and you became brothers; and you were at the brim of the abyss of fire from where He delivered you. Allah thus makes His Signs clear to you that you may be guided. 
3.104  	And let there be a people among you who do the good, and who call towards the good and who dispel the evil - for, they are victorious.
3.105	And do not become like those who divided and differed (254) among themselves after clear signs have come to them; for them is the painful torment.
3.106	On that day, some faces will be bright, and some faces will be dark. It will be said to those whose faces are dark: "Did you become disbelievers after you have believed? So taste the punishment for your disbelief."
3.107	And those whose faces are bright will be in the benevolence of Allah, and they will abide therein.(255)
3.108	The Signs of Allah - We reveal these to you in truth; and, Allah will not cause injustice to the people of the worlds.
3.109	To Allah is whatever in the heavens and whatever in the earth; and, all affairs shall return unto Allah.(256)
3.110	You are the best model created for the people of the world - you do the good and dispel the evil; and, you believe in Allah. If the people of the Book do believe likewise, it is good for them - among them are they who believe, but most of them are defiant transgressors.(257)
3.111	Such of these shall cause no harm to you at all, but a trifling hurt; and, if they come to oppose you, they will show their backs; and, they will not be helped.
3.112    Wherever they are, upon them is disgrace; and, there is no way for them except with severe restrictions from Allah, and from humankind - they have gotten into the wrath of Allah. And, poverty is cast on them; this is so because, they rejected the signs of Allah and killed the prophets unjustly; and, they were disbelieving and were people, transgressing.(258)
3.113	They are not equals - among the 'People of the Book' is a community, steadfast in the remembrance of the signs of Allah during the night. And they surrender to Allah.(259)
3.114	They believe in Allah and the Last Day; they espouse righteousness and dispel the evil; and, they hasten towards the good activities; such are they, of the righteous.(260)
3.115	None of their righteous works would ever be overlooked. And Allah knows well, the pious.
3.116	Surely those who reject, their wealth and their children will avail them naught against Allah; they belong to hellfire, and they shall dwell therein.
3.117	The example for their spending in this world, is like the wind, freezing into ice storm - causing sweeping destruction to the tilth of those who wronged themselves. Allah had not wronged them, but they wronged themselves.
3.118	O those who believe! Make not dear to you those who are not of you; it is because they will not slacken in causing harm to you, and they love you to be in grief. And, their hatred for you has come out of their mouths; what they hide in their breasts is much more. Verily, We have made clear the Signs - if you have sense.
3.119	Beware! It is ye who love them, but they do not love you. You abide by every verse of the Book; and, when they are with you, they say: "We believe." But when they are alone, they bite their fingertips in their rage against you. Say to them: Die in your rage! Verily, Allah knows what is in the breasts.  
3.120	If any good happens to you it aggrieves them, and if any evil befalls you they rejoice at it; but, if you remain patient and fear God, their plot against you will harm you naught. Verily, Allah surrounds all that they do. 
3.121	You went to the people in the early hours, leaving your household, to inspire the believers in the war against falsehood. Allah is All Hearing, All Knowing.
3.122	When fear gripped two sections among you, Allah was the protector for them; so, let the faithful put their wholesome trust in Allah.
3.123	In Badr - Allah had certainly helped you when you were weak; therefore, fear Allah that you may show thanks.(261)
3.124	You said to the believers: "Is it not sufficient for you that your God helps you with three thousand angels, sent down?"
3.125	"Yes. If you observe patience and fear Allah - even if the enemies pounce upon you, this very moment, your God will help you with five thousand angels having marks."
3.126	Allah has not done this but to give peace to your souls and to make this as a glad-tiding; and, there is no help but from Allah. He is Mighty, Wise.
3.127    And to destroy a section of the rejecters, or to make them retreat, defeated and debased.
3.128	Not your decision in this! Allah may either forgive them or punish them - for, indeed they are wicked. 
3.129    Unto Allah belongs all that is in the skies and the earth; He relents towards whom He will, and punishes whom He will. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 
3.130	O those who believe! Devour not usury increasing one upon another; and, fear Allah - you will be victorious.
3.131	And fear the fire! It is prepared for the rejecters.
3.132	Obey Allah and the messenger; that you will receive mercy.
3.133	And race towards the forgiveness of your God and to paradise; its expanse is as that of skies and the earth; and, it is prepared for the God fearing.
3.134	They will spend for purity, in their ease, and in their adversity; and, they will restrain from anger; and, they will forgive men, and Allah loves the good doers.
3.135	And when they involve in vileness or wrong themselves, they remember Allah and seek for their correction, then and there; and, who shall correct the wrongs but Allah? And they will not be mulish while they know.
3.136	For them the reward from their God is Forgiveness and Paradises beneath which rivers flow, and they abide therein. A goodly reward for those who do such good!
3.137	Certainly before you many a culture has passed; so, behold those on the earth who denied. What an evil end to them!
3.138	This is a clear conscience to humankind and guidance, and a glad tiding to the God fearing.
3.139	Therefore weaken not, nor grieve. And if you are believers you will be the superior ones.
3.140	If you undergo a test, similarly for others too are the testing times; and, We make such periods come amidst you by turns; this is so, that Allah knows the abiders, and to choose the witnesses amongst you; and, Allah loves not the wrong doers.(262)
3.141	And it is that Allah purifies the abiders and destroys the deniers.
3.142	Or is it your belief that you will enter the Paradise without Allah knowing who among you are firm in your belief, and in patience?(263)
3.143    You do see now before your very eyes - the death, you were longing for long -
3.144	Muhammad is but a messenger; many messengers have gone before him. If he dies, or killed, will you turn about on your heels? And if anyone turns about on his heels, he cannot harm Allah in any way; and, Allah will reward the thankful.
3.145	Not a soul shall depart before the appointed time and without the leave of Allah (264). Anyone who loves the pleasures of this world We give them only from it, and to those who prefer the hidden blessings of Allah, We grace them of it; and, We will reward the thankful.
3.146	And many Prophets and great numbers of them relying only on their God joined with them in the just war; and, they did not lose heart when they suffered in the path of Allah; neither did they weaken, nor did they surrender - Allah loves the patient ones.
3.147	And they, but said, "Our God, forgive us our sins and the excesses of our evil works (265); make our foothold sure, and help us against the disbelieving people." 
3.148	So, Allah gave them the reward of this world and the beauty of the heavens (266); and, Allah loves those who are righteous.
3.149	O believers! If you obey the disbelievers, they will make you turn around on your heels; then, you will turn around as losers. 
3.150	But Allah is your Protector, and He is the Best of helpers.
3.151    We shall strike terror into the hearts of the deniers, for they took besides Allah for which He had sent down no authority; and, their resting place is fire. Wretched is the dwelling place of the sinful.
3.152	And Allah certainly did fulfil His Promise to you; when you were in a position to destroy the enemies by His leave, you dithered and differed at the command; and, you deviated from the order after He had shown you what you wished. Among you are they who desire this world; and, there are they who look up to heavenly life. Then as a test, He caused you to recoil from your enemies; and, He indeed did forgive you. And Allah is ever bountiful upon the believers. 
3.153	When your messenger was crying at you from your behind, you ran to your safety without looking at anyone; so, as a recompense, He increased you in grief upon grief; this is that you shall not be sad concerning your loss or during a trying period. And Allah knows well what you do.
3.154    Then, after the grief, He caused sleep to descend upon you for your peace; the sleep surrounded a party of you; and, as to the other party - their minds have cast worry upon them; and they, like the ignorant, began to suspect Allah in difference to the Truth. They said: "Is there anything in our favour in this?" Say: "About this, is solely with Allah." They conceal in their breasts that they cannot say openly to you - they say to themselves: in this, was there anything in our favour, we would not have been killed here. Say, "Even if you were in your houses, those upon whom death is decreed, they would have reached their death-spot; this is that Allah tests those that are in your hearts and to purify your hearts of them. And Allah knows all that is in your breasts.    
3.155	Those who turned away from among you on the day when the two parties met, Shaitan made them waver because of their evil deeds; surely, Allah has forgiven them; and, verily Allah is Forgiving, Tolerant.
3.156	O believers, do not become like the disbelievers; they speak about their brothers who were striving or journeying and say, "Had they been with us they would not have been dead or killed." But Allah does so to cast anguish in their hearts; it is Allah who gives life and causes death; and, Allah Sees all that you do.
3.157	And if you are dead or killed in the path of Allah, the forgiveness and the grace you receive from Allah will be far greater than what they had stored up.
3.158	Whether you die or are killed, unto Allah you will be gathered.
3.159	You are gentle towards them because of Allah's Grace; had you been hard and harsh hearted they would have run away from about you. So, endure them, and pray forgiveness for them; and, do consult with them on all matters; but, once you have decided, put your trust only in Allah. Verily, Allah loves those who trust Him.
3.160    If Allah helps you, then there is none to overcome you; but, if He abandons you, who is there to help you after Him? So, let the believers put their trust in Allah alone.
3.161	It is not for a Prophet to be treacherous! And if any one were guilty of treachery, he would bring his treachery on the last day. On that day, each one will be recompensed for what he had earned; and, they will not be wronged.
3.162	Will one who follows the Will of Allah, be like him who has incurred upon himself the wrath of Allah? His abode is hell; what an evil resting place!
3.163	For them are many grades with Allah; and, Allah is Seer of all they do.
3.164    Surely Allah had showered Grace upon the believers; He raised among them a Messenger from themselves; he explains to them His Signs and refines them; and, he gives them the Wisdom and the Insight, although they had been in clear error all through.
3.165    When an affliction touches, you say, "Wherefrom this!" though you had caused twice as much an affliction. Say, "This is from you. Surely, Allah has Power over all things."(267)
3.166	And when the two parties met one against the other, the disaster you suffered is only by the leave of Allah; it is that the believers are made known.
3.167	And it is that the hypocrites are brought into the open; it is said to them: "Come! Commit ye, in the cause of Allah or halt. They said: "Had we known about war, surely we would have followed you." On that day they were closer to disbelief than to belief; they said with their mouths what they did not have in their hearts. And Allah knows well all they hide.
3.168	Sitting back they said about their brothers, "Had they followed us, they would not have been slain." Say, "If you are truthful, prevent death from touching you."
3.169	Never think of those who were slain in the cause of Allah as dead; they are alive with their Creator; they are well sustained.
3.170	They are at peace with the elegance that Allah has bestowed upon them; and, about those who have not yet joined them, joyfully say - they shall neither fear; nor shall they grieve.
3.171	They rejoice over the elegance and the bounties bestowed upon them from Allah, and that Allah will not waste the reward of the believers.
3.172	They are those who responded to the call of Allah and the Messenger even in their testing times- and there is the goodly reward for those among them who did good deeds and feared Allah.
3.173	They are those in whom their faith had certainly increased when some of the people came to them and said, "Surely people have gathered against you, and so fear them." And they said, "Sufficient for us is Allah; and, He is the Best Disposer of affairs."
3.174    So they returned with grace and bounties from Allah; no harm touched them; and, they followed the Will of Allah; Allah is the possessor of the rich bounties.
3.175	It is only Shaitan who strikes fear in you through his accomplices; so, fear them not, but fear Me if you are believers.
3.176    Their rapid advance in evil deeds need not cause alarm in you; surely, they cannot, in the least, harm Allah; Allah wishes to deprive them of any good in the hereafter; and, for them is the torment severe.
3.177	Those who purchased 'desires' at the cost of faith in Allah, shall indeed harm not Allah at all - and, to them is a painful doom.
3.178	And let the disbelievers not consider the delay We cause bids well to them; the delay We cause to them is only to make them increase in their sins; and, for them is a disgraceful torment.
3.179    Allah does not wish to leave you - O believers, in your present position until He discriminates the wrong doers from the righteous ones; and, it is not that Allah reveals to you of the Unseen. It is because Allah chooses whom He will from His Messengers; so, believe in Allah and His Messengers (268); if you believe in Allah and fear Him, there awaits a grand reward for you.
3.180    And let not those who show stinginess in the grace that Allah has bestowed upon them consider it as good for them; nay, it is evil to them! All that they amassed by stinginess will have them wound around their necks on the Lasting Day. And unto Allah is the inheritance of the skies and the earth; and, Allah is cognizant of what you do.
3.181	Allah has certainly heard the saying of those who said: "Allah, indeed, is poor; and, we are bountiful." We will record their saying and their unjust killing (269) of the prophets; and We will say to them: "Taste the torment of scorching Hell fire!"
3.182	It is the evil that which your hands had sent forth before; and verily, Allah does not wrong His bondsmen.
3.183	And they say: "Allah has made a covenant with us that we are not to believe any Messenger until his sacrifice is put to the test of engulfing fire." Say: "Answer me then, why did you kill the Messengers that came to you before me despite the fact they had very certainly shown you the clear signs and that which you asked for, if you are truthful?"(270)
3.184	Therefore, if they belie you - before you the Prophets were belied too, who brought them the clear signs, and the Wisdom and the Luminous Book.
3.185	Each one shall have to die; and, only on the judgement Day, you will be fully recompensed. So, he who is saved far away from the fire and made to enter heaven, surely he has attained victory. And this worldly life is but the enjoyment of deception.
3.186	Most certainly you will be tested by your wealth and soul; and, you will hear many an abuse from those who were given the Book earlier to you and from those who associate partners with God; but if you observe patience and fear Allah, verily, it is the firmest of all deeds.(271)
3.187    And remember when Allah took the covenant from those who were given the book that they should re-cite it to the people and that they are not to hide it; but, they threw it behind their backs, in exchange for a mean price; what evil earning was that!
3.188	Never do you have in mind concerning those who are joyous about their works and those who love to be praised for what they have not done - are free from their punishment; and, for them is a painful doom.
3.189	To Allah belongs the kingdom of the skies and the earth, and Allah has Power over all things.
3.190	Surely in the creation of the skies and the earth, and in the changing night and day, indeed, are the signs for men of understanding. 
3.191	Such remember Allah while standing, sitting and while reclining on their sides; and, pondering the creation of the skies and the earth they - "Our God, You had not created all these in vain; You are MostPure; save us from the distress of fire."
3.192	"Our God, whomever You cause to enter the fire, certainly You had disgraced him, and there are no helpers for the wrong doers."	
3.193	"Our God, surely we believed heeding the call of him who called us to the path of belief, saying: 'Believe in your God.' "Our God, forgive us our sins and drive away from us our evil; and, capture our souls with the enlightened."
3.194	"Our God, bless us with what You have promised us through Your messengers, and save us from the disgrace on the day of resurrection; and, certainly You will not disown Promises."
3.195	So their God accepted their prayer: "I will never let go in vain the deeds of those men or women among you. Of you, one is of the other, and therefore, surely I will remove the evils of those who emigrated, of those who were evicted, of those who suffered in My path, of those who strived with forbearance and of those who were killed. And I will surely make them enter the heavens beneath which rivers flow; and, this is the reward from Allah; and, with Him, Allah, are many more grand rewards."
3.196	Let not those who joyously move about the cities deceive you.
3.197 	The meanest joy indeed, - then their refuge is hell, an evil abode!
3.198	And for those who fear God, are the heavens with rivers flowing beneath, and they abide therein forever. And this, a feast from Allah; and that, what is with Allah for the well informed, is the most beauteous.
3.199    And indeed there are some among the people of the Book; they believe in Allah, and that which is sent down to you, and that which is sent down to them. And they fear Allah; and, they will not sell the grace of Allah for a mean worldly price. The generous reward for them is with their God; and, Allah is swift in reckoning.
3.200	O believers, be patient and forbear! And strengthen ye in both and fear Allah - so you will be victors.


Chapter 4
The Women

4.1	O humankind, fear your God; He created you all from One Soul, and of it, He created your spouse; then, from both, He made you spread as men and women. And fear Allah, only by whom you clarify among yourselves and of your womb relations; and indeed, Allah is ever watchful over you. 
4.2	Hand ye over, the properties of the orphans, and give them not the bad for the good, and devour not their properties with yours; verily, this is the greatest sin.
4.3	If you fear you cannot behave with the orphans - with moral rightness marry of the women in two, or three or four (272); and, if you know you lack morality, then stay with one or suffice is that what you have as the righteous one; and, this is the easiest way to stay away from being a transgressor.
4.4	Hand over to your women a handsome marriage gift; if they part with it anything to you, then you shall receive it happily and wholeheartedly.
4.5	If they are not responsible enough, do not give them the wealth in your possession as a sustenance for you; however, you feed them and clothe them from it; and, speak to them with kind words.
4.6    	Manage the orphans until they come of age; then, if you see in them the understanding, deliver to them their wealth, and devour not their property hastily and extravagantly, sensing their growth to maturity. And let them refrain if they are rich, and if they are poor, they can have just remuneration from their wealth, and keep witnesses over them while you hand over their property to them - Allah suffices as a Reckoner.
4.7	In what the parents or the near relations leave behind, therein is the portion(273) for men; likewise, in what the parents or the near relations leave behind, therein is the portion(273) for women - however greater or lesser it is; the portion(273) is decreed.
4.8    	When you come to share the responsibilities as to your portions, if there comes unto you, your kinsfolk, or the orphans, or the needy, give them therefrom; and, speak only kind words to them.                       
4.9	And let them fear about the fate of the weak off-springs they should leave behind; and, let them fear Allah, and speak only kind words.
4.10	Verily those who eat up the wealth of the orphans with unjust greed, they devour only fire into their stomachs; and, they will enter the burning fire.(274)
4.11    	Allah directs you that the men shall bear twice the share of responsibility as that of their women folks. If there are only women, and they are two or more, they shall bear two-thirds responsibility of what the deceased had left behind; but if there is only one woman, her share of responsibility is, half - and if there is a sibling to the deceased one, the parents each shall bear one-sixth share of responsibility he has left behind; but if the deceased has no siblings but his parents alone are the heirs, then his mother's share is a third; and if the deceased has brothers, then his mother's share is only a sixth. Such responsibilities shall have to be shared only after settling his will and his debts - your parents and kinfolk, you shall never know who among these is nearer to you in help; this is a command from Allah; surely, Allah is All Knowing, Wise.(275)
4.12      And whatever your wives leave behind, and if they have no children, then your responsibility is half; but if they have children, then upon you is one-fourth - after fulfilling her will and debts. And if you have no children, they bear one-fourth responsibility of what you leave; but if you have a child, then their share of responsibility is one-eighth of what you leave - after fulfilling your will and debt. And a man or a woman having no ascendants or descendants - but if he has a brother or sister, then upon each of them is one-sixth. But if they are more than this, then they share equally of a third of total responsibility; after fulfilling their will and debt. Nevertheless, none of you shall suffer any loss - enjoined by Allah. And Allah is All Knowing, Most Patient.(276)
4.13	These are the limits of Allah; whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger, He will make them enter the heavens beneath which rivers ever flow, and they will abide therein forever; and, this is the Victory, grand.
4.14	Whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger and exceeds the limits of Allah; He will make him enter the hell where he will abide; and, for him is a disgraceful punishment.
4.15	If any of your women are guilty of lewdness, call to witness four from among you; and, if they had testified, then have them protected in their houses until such time Allah allows them a way or till their death. 
4.16	Punish both the parties among you who would do it; and if they repent leave them to their will; Allah indeed is Oft Returning, Merciful.(277)
4.17	Whoever does evil works foolishly and soon after repents - to them is Forgiveness with Allah; Allah accepts their repentance. And Allah is All Knowing, Wise.(278)
4.18    	But regarding those who keep with their evil works - and finally when they see their death, they're saying, "I repent and I seek forgiveness" - to these and to them who die as disbelievers, there is no Forgiveness. And We have prepared for them the torment, most painful.
4.19    	O believers! Do not possess women through oppression; and unless they openly involve in indecency, do not subject them to stress so that you may take away individual wealth you had given them; and, behave with them gently even when you hate them. You may hate something; but, Allah shall increase enormous good in it.(279)
4.20	If you desire another woman in the place of one wife, do not take away anything from her of the treasure you might have given her; do you take it by slandering and by manifest sin?
4.21	How can you take it away while she had received the promise from you and you had become one with the other?
4.22	Except that which had happened before - do not marry the women whom your fathers had married; surely such practice is indecent, vile and an evil path.
4.23    	Forbidden to you are your mothers, and your daughters; and your sisters; and your paternal sisters; and your maternal sisters; and your brothers' daughters; and your sisters' daughters; and your breastfed mothers; and your breastfed sisters, and your wives' mothers. And when you have married a woman and solemnised with her, then you shall not marry her daughter under your care, born to her previous husbands; but, if solemnization with your wife has not taken place, then no blame on you. And you shall not marry the wives of the sons born to you; and, it is detestable to have two 'sisterly wives' on the same bed, unless it be a thing of the past. Allah indeed is Most Forgiving, Merciful.
4.24	And it is unlawful to you to marry the women having husbands save those women who were held by slavery - such is Allah's decree on you; and, it is destined on you that you shall not desire women wrongfully, but marry them by giving them a handsome dowry of your wealth; you should give a handsome dowry of your wealth because you have solace in their nearness; however, there is no blame on you if the two come to an agreement after the dower had been fixed; verily, Allah is All Knowing, Wise.
4.25	If any of you have not the means to marry the free and believing women - let them from among those believing slave - caring women under your guardianship; Allah knows well your faith; and, some of you are one of the other; therefore marry the believing slave-women with the permission of their owners; and give them their dower; and, may the women be pure, not involving in prostitution or adultery. So after the marriage, if they are of indecent behaviour, the punishment for them is only half of what will be given to free married-women. Such is the admonition to those who fear they might abet sin. It is very good for you if you are patient. And Allah is Most Forgiving, Merciful.
4.26	Allah wishes to give you the vision, to conduct you in the path of those who went before you and to give you forgiveness. And Allah is All Knowing, All Wise. 
4.27	And Allah wishes to accept repentance, but those who follow their desires, want you to swerve away mightily. 
4.28	And Allah wants easiness for you, for man is a weakling. 
4.29	O believers! Do not eat up others' properties between yourselves wrongfully, except through a fair trade between you; and do not kill yourselves; and verily, Allah is ever compassionate towards you.  
4.30 	And whoever exceeds in such unjust, soon We will cause them to enter hell; it is easy to Allah.
4.31	If you keep away from major sins of what is forbidden, We will forgive your wrongs and allow you entry into excellent places.
4.32	And desire not that by which Allah has placed some of you, above some of you; to men is their due, and to women is their due; so, seek from Allah, His grace. Verily, Allah is the Knower of all things.
4.33	And We have made heirs of what parents and relatives have left behind; likewise, give the share to those with whom you have an agreement. Allah indeed is a witness over all things.
4.34	Allah has placed one in status, above the other; He had made men abler than the women and that they are to spend their wealth; so the righteous women, during their testing period would guard their nobility by the protection of Allah. And give them the admonition - concerning the women, they are likely to err with; stay away from their bed; and, be stern with them; and if they take to righteousness, then do not find ways against them. Surely, Allah is Magnanimous, Mighty.
4.35	If you fear separation between the two, then bring an arbiter - one from the side of the husband and one from the side of the wife; and if they wish reconciliation, Allah will cause between them, unity. Verily, Allah is Encompassing, Perceiver. 
4.36    	And call on only Allah and do not associate anything with Him. And help your parents, and the kith, and the orphans, and the needy, and the relatives in the neighbourhood, and the inhabitants in the area, and the companions, and those in the straight path and your righteous servants with kindness. Surely Allah does not love those who are arrogant and boastful.
4.37	It is them who are stingy and prompt others to be stingy while they hide the bounties Allah had bestowed on them; for the disbelievers, We have prepared a humiliating chastisement.
4.38	And those who spend their wealth as a show unto others, and deny Allah and the Last Day; and, to whom shaitan becomes a companion - he is the evilest of all companions.
4.39 	What ill shall befall them if they believe in Allah and the Last day and give out of what Allah had bestowed on them? And Allah knows them well.
4.40 	Verily, Allah will not cause injustice even a trifle; and, if they have any good He will multiply it, and He would give from Him even graciously.
4.41	Ah, what will be their plight when We bring each community with the witness, and if We bring you also a witness against them? 
4.42    	On that day those who rejected and deviated from the Messenger would dearly wish that the earth shall swallow them up and level them with it, yet they cannot hide any hadith from Allah.(280)
4.43    	O you who believe, do not get near to any Holiness when you are fuzzy, and till you know what you are saying; and, until you bathe when you feel polluted - except that when you happen to pass by it. But if you are ill, or on a journey, or you have been to the toilet, or have touched your women - if you do not find water, then touch pure soil with your hands and wipe your faces and hands with it. Surely Allah is ever Relenting, Forgiving.
4.44	Have you not seen those who were given a part of the Book? They buy the unrighteousness and desire that you go astray.(281)
4.45	And Allah knows well your enemies; Allah suffices as Protector, and Allah suffices as Helper.
4.46    	Some among Jews change the meanings from their intended places - 'we heard, and we will differ.' And they say, 'listen - let them not hear; and, look at us,' twisting their tongues traducing the path. But if they had said, "We heard, and we obeyed" and said, 'have mercy upon us' it would have been much better and fair for them. Allah has cursed them on account of their pride; so, except for a few will not believe.
4.47	O you, the people of the Book, believe in what We have revealed confirming what is with you - before We change and turn your faces to your backs or curse you as We cursed the people of Saturday; and, Allah's command will be executed.(282)
4.48	Surely Allah will not forgive the sin of association to Him; except for this, He forgives anything for whom He will; and, who so associates with Allah anything, has indeed imagined a grave sin.
4.49    	Do you not see those who praise themselves for purity? Nay, Allah purifies whom He will; and, none will be wronged even the hair upon a date-stone.
4.50	See how they imagine lies against Allah; and, this is sufficient for a manifest sin.
4.51	Do you not see those to whom a part of the Book is given? While believing in the idols and shaitan, they say about the disbelievers, "These are better guided on the Path than the believers."
4.52	It is them Allah curses; and, who so Allah curses, you will not find a helper for them.
4.53	Or, have they a share in the Kingdom? If that is so, they will not give the people the speck on a date-stone.
4.54	Or, do they envy that by which Allah blessed men by His grace? But We gave the descendants of Ibrahim, the Book, and its Revelation; and, with that, We gave them a great kingdom.
4.55	Of them some believed, and some turned their faces away from it; burning hell would suffice.
4.56	who so rejects Our Signs, We will surely make them enter hell; and, to increase them in their agony, We will keep creating new skins even as they are being burnt; Surely, Allah is Mighty, Wise.
4.57	Those who believe and do good deeds, We will make them enter the paradise wherein the rivers flow underneath, and they will abide therein forever; and, for them are the purest companions, and We will admit them into the shades of the thicket.
4.58	Allah indeed commands you to render the trusts to their owners; and, when you judge between the people, judge with justice; and, Allah indeed gives you excellent advice. Surely Allah is Hearer, Seer.
4.59	O you who believe, obey Allah and obey the messenger; and, those in authority among you. If there is a dispute over anything, refer it to Allah and  His Messenger, if you are believers in Allah and His judgement; that is better; and fairer in the issue.
4.60	Do you not see the disputers who claim to believe in what is revealed to you and in what was revealed to those before you? And surely when they were ordered to abjure Shaitan - they desire his ruling; and, Shaitan wishes to mislead them away, far astray. 
4.61	And when said to them to come to what Allah has revealed, and to the messenger - you will see the hypocrites turn away from you.
4.62	How worse would it be if a calamity befalls them for what their hands have sent forth? Then they come to you swearing by Allah: "We had not intended except good-will and conciliation!"
4.63	Those are they, the secrets of whose hearts Allah Knows - so keep away from them and admonish them, and speak to them words with clarity that touch their souls.
4.64    	We have not sent any of the messengers except to obey the commands of Allah; so, if any among them come to you seeking forgiveness of Allah, after wronging themselves - and, as Messenger you too had asked forgiveness for them, they would have found Allah Most Forgiving, Merciful.
4.65	But no, by your God, they are not believers until they make you a judge, and accept your decision in their disputes, without straitness in their hearts, and abide with full submission.
4.66    	And had We ordained, "Sacrifice yourselves; or exile," but for a few, most would not have complied with; but, had they submitted, it would have been good for them, and might have been of great strength."
4.67	Then, from Us, We would have given them a bounteous reward.
4.68	And We would have shown them the right path.
4.69	Whoever obeys Allah and His messenger will be with the blessed ones by Allah, - the Prophets, and the Truthful, and the Martyrs and the righteous - It is them who are the companions, beautiful.
4.70	That is the Grace of Allah; Allah suffices as the Knower.
4.71	O those who believe! Be cautious. And go forth in small groups or go forth all together.
4.72	And certainly there are a few among you who lag behind; then, if an affliction touches you, they say: "Allah has definitely favoured me in that I was not present with them."
4.73	If from Allah you receive a fortune they will surely say as if there were no relations between you and them and say, "Oh, should I not have been with them? If so, I too would have attained great fortune."
4.74	So, whoever wishes the Hereafter, let them sacrifice in the cause of Allah now - whoever happens to die or attains victory in the cause of Allah, soon We will grant them a mighty reward. 
4.75	"And why have you not prepared yourself for just-war in the Way of Allah to protect the weak among men and women, and children?" They say: "O our God, remove us from the vicinity of the wrongdoers; and give us protection from You, and give us help from You."
4.76	Those who believe strive in the cause of Allah; and, the disbelievers contend in shaitan's way. So, fight justly against the companions of Shaitan; and, ever weak is the Shaitan's plot.
4.77	Have you not seen those to whom when it is said, "Restrain your hands, and be constant in His remembrance and spend for purity?" Then when the command of just-war came to them, a party of them dreading men more than they ought to have feared Allah, said: Our God! Why did You ordain war for us? Could You not have postponed it yet, a while?" Say: This world's life is mean; the life to come is better for those who fear Allah; and, you will not suffer injustice to a date-thread. (283)
4.78	Wherever you are, death will touch you - even if you are inside the powerfully built fortresses; if any good befalls them, they say, "It is from Allah." But if any harm afflicts them, they say, "It is from you." Say: All has come only from Allah; what has happened to these people? They do not comprehend any Hadith, - a Message!
4.79	Every good that befalls you, it is from Allah, but if any evil touches you, it is only from you; We have sent you as only a Messenger to humanity; and, Allah is enough as a witness. 
4.80	Whoever obeys the Messenger; he obeys Allah. But, if any rejects, We have not sent you as a Watcher over them.
4.81	They pledge their obedience; but, when they sally forth from you, a party of them plots against what you have said, during the night; and, Allah records all that they plotted by night; therefore, slight them and put your trust in Allah - and Allah suffices as a Protector.
4.82	Should they not ponder this Quran? If it had been from, other than Allah, they would have found much contradiction in it. 
4.83	And when they overhear any news of fear or security, they immediately spread it around; but, if they inform it to the Messenger or to the proper authorities, then, among them, perception would savvy it. And had it not been for the Mercy and Grace of Allah, most of you would have followed Shaitan, save a few.
4.84	So strive in the path of Allah; none but you shall you force; but, inspire those who believe; Allah will forestall the opposition of the disbelievers - for Allah is Mighty, severe in Punishing. 
4.85	Whoever intercedes in a noble intercession he has a share therein; and, whoever intercedes in an evil intercession he shares the burden of it. And ever is Allah, the Keeper, over all things.(284)
4.86	When someone bids you with liveliness, you bid him with more of it; or return it in its likeness. Verily, Allah keeps account of everything.
4.87    	Allah - there is none but He; surely He will gather you all on the Last Day, and there is no doubt in it. And who is the most Truthful in announcing the hadiths - events.(285)
4.88	What is it with you then that you have two opinions about the hypocrites? On account of their evil works Allah has cast them back. Do you desire to guide the ones whom Allah has sent astray? Whom Allah has left astray, you will not find for him a way.
4. 89	They long that you become one with them by disbelieving as they disbelieve; so take not for friends from any among them until they start forth striving in the path of Allah; if they turn against you, then seize them wherever you see them and sever any tie-ups with them; and do not take from them a friend nor any helper.
4.90    	But whoever joins people, between whom and you there is equanimity, or those who have come to you, not having the heart to oppose you, nor to fight their people. Had Allah willed, He would have given power over you; and they would have certainly fought against you. If they stayed away from you, and fight you not, and offer you peace - then, Allah allows not a way for you against them.(286)
4.91	You will find others - they desire protection from you and their people; and, if they are called to create mischief they will plunge therein headlong. Such of these - if they do not keep away and leave you not in peace, nor restrain their hands from you, then take and slay them wherever you find them; and, over them, we have given you an authority.
4.92	But by mistake, it is not for a believer to kill another believer; the compensation for him who kills a believer by mistake is that he shall set free a bondman; and, he shall give the blood money to the dead family except when the family members forsake it as charity. If the killed belongs to your enemy camp but a believer himself, it is enough to set free a bondman. And, if he belongs to the people with whom there is a peace treaty, it is that you shall give the blood money to the deceased, even as you set free a bondman. But if you have no means to it, you shall take to fasting for two consecutive months to seek forgiveness from Allah. And Allah is All-Aware, Wise. 
4.93	Whoever kills a believer wantonly - then his just punishment is hell wherein he shall abide forever. And upon him is Allah's wrath and the curse; and, He has prepared for him a mighty torment.
4.94	O you who believe! If you have taken to the path of Allah, know this clearly: you shall not say to the one who offers you peace, "You are not a believer," with an eye upon self-destructible worldly wealth; ample are the spoils with Allah. Even thus were ye yourselves before. Allah showered His grace upon you. Therefore stay clarified. And Allah is ever watchful over all that you do. 
4.95	Not equals are those who stay back without any reason, and those who are steadfast and strive with their lives and their properties in the cause of Allah. And, Allah has raised those who sacrificed their wealth and lives, above in ranks, over those who sit behind; but, Allah has promised each his share of the goodly reward. But whoever strives, sacrificing, Allah has placed them upon the generous bounties, high above those who sit behind.
4.96	Bestows Greater positions, His Forgiveness, and Grace - it is so because Allah is Ever-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
4.97   	Indeed, when the angels seize the souls of those who wronged themselves, will say: "What was your state on the earth?" They will say, "We were in a fragile state." To this they will say, "Was not Allah's earth vast; and, should you not have gone forth on the land?" Therefore their refuge is hell; what an evil abode to visit!"
4.98	Spared, are the weak ones among the men, the women and the children - for they know not any plan and have not guidance.
4.99	Allah is sufficient to forgive them. Allah is Most Forgiving; Oft Returning.
4.100	And whoever goes forth on the land in exile, he will find immense refuge and abundant provisions; and, whoever dies in exile as he sets forth in the cause of Allah and following the messenger, then it is surely upon Allah, they are to be gracefully rewarded. And Allah is Most Forgiving, MostKind.
4.101	While you are on the Path, it is no blame on you to prune your course, if you fear deviltry by the disbelievers; the disbelievers indeed, are your open enemies.
4.102	And when you are with them and stand to strengthen their faith, let a section of them stand with you with their arms; when they are strengthened, let them take the rear position. And let those who are yet to be strengthened come forward to you for strengthening; and, they too with their weapons. Be vigilant; for if you are inattentive about your arms and supplies, the disbelievers desire to ambush you, but there is no sin of you to put down your arms if there is inconvenience due to rain or your illness; but be aware. Assuredly, Allah has prepared a humiliating chastisement for the disbelievers.
4.103	Thus when you are strengthened in your faith, keep remembering Allah: while standing, sitting, and resting on your sides, and when the peaceful situation settles, surrender to His Will in time; indeed, to 'prostrate to His Will' is a timed ordinance upon the believers.(287)  
4.104	So, slacken not in reaching out to the masses; if you suffer, they surely suffer too as you suffer; but, what you foresee from Allah, they cannot expect. And Allah is ever Knowing, Wise.
4.105	We have surely sent down this Book upon you in truth so that you deal justly with the people by what Allah has revealed to you; so, do not be of those who advocate for the treacherous.(288)
4.106	Seek forgiveness from Allah; surely, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, ever Merciful.
4.107	Plead not on behalf of them who betray themselves, for Allah certainly does not love the evil minded, treacherous ones.
4.108	They hide from the people, but they cannot hide from Allah because He is with them when they plot against His words by night; and, Allah ever encompasses all they do.
4.109	Ah, those of you who argue for them in worldly life! Who will plead for them with Allah on the Day of judgement? Or, who will then be their defender?
4.110	And whoever sins or wrongs himself - but if he turns to Allah for forgiveness, surely he would find Allah Most Forgiving, Most Merciful.
4.111	And whoever sins, he sins against his soul; and, Allah is All-Knowing, Wise.
4.112	And whoever earns a blame or sin, and then throws it upon an innocent, he indeed, carries upon him a calumny and a grave sin.
4.113	And were it not for the grace and mercy of Allah upon you, a party among them would have tried their worst to lead you astray; but, it is not that they could lead astray but themselves; and, no harm could they cause to you in any way. And Allah has blessed upon you the Book and the Wisdom; and, He has taught you that you knew not. And upon you, great is the Grace of Allah.
4.114	There is no fairness at all in most of their secret counselling except when they do so to bring about peace among the people, upholding the Truth with the right heart; and, whoever does so for the pleasure of Allah, We give him a mighty reward.
4.115	And whoever deviates from the messenger, after the guidance has come to him, and takes to a way the believers would not, We shall leave him in his way, and make him enter hell - an evil end to the journey! 
4.116	Indeed, Allah forgives not setting up partners to Him; but for this, He forgives whom He will; and whoever sets up partners unto Allah, he surely has wandered far astray.
4.117	Besides Him whom they call upon are not but women; and, they invoke not except shaitan, the rebellious. 
4.118	Allah cursed him. And, he said, "I shall surely take away a party of your servants;
4.119	"And surely I will lead them astray; and, throw vanities in their hearts; and, urge them to cut off the ears of the cattle; and, I will motivate them to mutilate all the natural provisions of Allah." Therefore who so leaves Allah, and makes friends with Shaitan, he indeed has suffered a grave loss.(289)
4.120	Shaitan promises them, and induces vain desires in them; and, Shaitan promises nothing but deception.
4.121	To them hell is the refuge, and they shall not find a way out of it.
4.122	And whoever believes and endures in righteousness, We will cause them to enter the heavens beneath which rivers ever flow, and wherein they abide forever. Allah's word is True; and, whose word is truer than Allah's?
4.123	Not by your whims, nor by the fancies of the people of the Book; whoever does evil, he shall be punished accordingly; and, he will not find a protector nor a helper besides Allah. 
4.124	So, men or women, whoever stands firm in righteousness, and is a believer, will enter heaven. And they will not be wronged, a single date-spot.
4.125	And who is leading the beautiful life, other than he, who bows his face only to Allah while he is righteous, and follows the true path of Ibrahim? And Allah has chosen Ibrahim for a friend.
4.126	And to Allah belongs all things in the skies and the earth. And Allah encompasses all things.
4.127    They ask you concerning women. Say: With Allah is their judgement! And the warning for you in the Book is about the orphan women: that you desire to marry them without bestowing them, with what is ordained upon you; and, about the softies among the children and in that you shall uphold justice for the orphans. And Allah is ever the Knower of whatever good you do.(290)
4.128	When a woman fears ill-treatment or forsaking from her husband, there is no sin on both of them to come to an equitable agreement between themselves - peace is much better; and, the hearts do swerve by greed, but if you do good and fear Allah, surely Allah is Aware of all you do.
4.129	And you will not be able to deal justly between women, however earnest you are; so, do not incline with all inclination to leave the other as a suspended one; and, if you are honest and fear Allah, then, indeed Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
4.130	And if they separate, Allah will enrich them each from His bounty. And Allah is All-Embracing, Wise.
4.131	And for Allah is what is in the skies and what is in the earth; and surely, We have ordained upon those who were given the Book before you and yourselves that you revere Allah; but if you deny, then indeed unto Allah is what is in the skies and what is in the earth. And Allah is Needless, Glorious.
4.132	And to Allah is what is in the skies and what is in the earth; and, He is sufficient as caretaker.
4.133	O, men! If Allah wills, He will efface you and would bring forth another populace. And over it, Allah is Potent.
4.134	Whoever desires the wages of this world - with Allah are the best of this world and the world next. Allah is Hearing, Seeing.
4.135	O, believers! Remain firm upon justice - even if being so is hostile to you, or to your parents, or to the near relatives, stand witness only unto Allah - whether they are rich or poor; for Allah has the eminence to protect them both. Therefore, follow not the desires over preserving righteousness. But, if you twist or turn away, Allah indeed is Knower of all you do.
4.136	O, believers! Keep up your faith in Allah and His messenger; and, in the Book which is sent down upon His messenger and upon the Book sent down earlier. And whoever turns away from Allah, His angels, His Proofs, His messengers - and the Lasting Day, - he is on a path far, far astray.
4.137	Whoever believes and then turns away; and then believes, and turns away, and goes far into error - Allah forgives them not, nor does He show them the way.
4.138	Give them the good news that the hypocrites are to suffer a painful doom.
4.139	They turn away from the believers and take disbelievers for friends; what! Do they seek dignity from them? Verily, all dignity belongs to Allah.
4.140	And He sends down upon you by the Book that if you come upon rejecting and ridiculing the Signs of Allah, do not sit with them until they engage in other than their hadiths-inventions; and, if you sit with them, you too are of them; surely, Allah will gather the hypocrites and the rejecters all in hell.(291)
4.141    They wait upon you; when you gain a victory from Allah, they say: "Were we not with you?" But if the chance were to be on the disbelievers they say: "Did we not protect you from the devotees though we had superiority over you?" And Allah will judge between you in the end; and yes, Allah will never allow a way for the disbelievers over the believers.
4.142    The hypocrites indeed wish to fool Allah, but He will befool them; and, when they are to stand firm for Allah, they lack life and make a show of the people; and they remember not Allah, but a little.
4.143	Neither with these nor with those - tossed in between; and, you will not find a way for those whom Allah had led astray.
4.144	O Believers! Do not take disbelievers for friends to the believers; do you wish to make clear evidence against you to Allah?
4.145	Verily, the hypocrites will be in the dark-depth of hell, and you will not find for them a helper.
4.146	Only those who repent and reform, and hold fast onto Allah; and, strive for their purity for Allah, will be with the believers. And soon shall Allah reward the believers.
4.147	What gain is Allah's by punishing you if you are grateful and a believer? Allah is Thankful, Cognizant.
4.148	Allah likes not affront except by those outraged; and Allah is Hearer, Knower.
4.149	When you do a good openly, or secretly, or forgive a wrong - for Allah indeed is Most Forgiving, All-Powerful.(292)
4.150	Surely those who disbelieve Allah and His messengers - aiming to cause division between Allah and His messengers, say: "We believe in some, and we disbelieve in some;" and, they wish to devise a path in between.(293)
4.151	These are indeed the disbelievers, and We have prepared for them a disgraceful punishment.(294)
4.152    Whoever believes in Allah and His messengers and differentiate not between any of them, then soon will He give them their reward; and, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Merciful.(295)
4.153    The people of the Book ask of you that you shall make a scripture descend upon them from the sky; and, they said to Musa even higher than this: "Show us, Allah, to our plain eyes!" So, thunder struck them on account of their transgression; then, they worshipped the calf even after the clear proofs have come to them; and, We pardoned that for them. And We gave Musa the clear Sign.
4.154	And We raised over them 'the Thur' at their covenant and said to them, "Enter its gate with humility"; and We said, "Breach not on Saturdays; and We took from them, a solemn covenant.(296)
4.155	Allah has sealed them for their breach of covenant, and for their rejection of Allah's Signs, and for their unjust killing of the Prophets; and, for that they said while rejecting, "Our hearts are veiled!" So, but for a very few, shall not believe.(297)
4.156	And for their disbelief; and, for their grave slander against Maryam;
4.157	And for their saying: We indeed have killed the Messiah Isa, the messenger of Allah, the son of Maryam - they neither killed him nor was he crucified; but, it was made to appear so. And those who differ therein surely are in doubt; except for assumptions they have least knowledge about it; verily, they had not killed him. 
4.158	But Allah did raise him up unto Him; and, Allah is Mighty, Wise.(298)
4.159	And assuredly, none of the people of the Book shall die without believing in him, before he dies. But on the Last Day, he would be a witness against them.(299)
4.160	And We have made the right provisions We had allowed for them earlier, as disagreeable to the Jews because of their sins; and, because they hindered most people from following Allah's Way.(300)
4.161	Though the usury is forbidden for them, and that they took it - and that they wrongfully devoured other's properties - We have prepared for the disbelievers among them a punishment, severe.
4.162	But among them who understand, and the believers who believe in what is revealed to you and what was revealed before you; and, they ever remain in Allah's remembrance. And spend of the pure provisions; and, are believers in Allah, and His appointed Hour - for them We have prepared a Mighty Reward. 
4.163    Verily We revealed to you through inspiration as We inspired prophet Nuh and the prophets who followed him. And We inspired the descendants of Ibrahim, Ismail, Ishaq, and Yaqub; and to Isa, Ayyub, Yunus, Harun, and Sulaiman. And We revealed 'Zabur' to Dawud.
4.164	We have revealed to you about the messengers before; and, about the messengers We have not spoken to you; and, Allah has conversed with Musa. 
4.165	So that there shall not be a proof of dissension for the people after the messengers have come to them - and that the messengers were only as givers of the glad tidings, and as warners; and Allah is All-Powerful, All-Knowing.
4.166	Allah Himself stands witness to what He has revealed to you; and, He sent it with His Wisdom; and, the angels do stand witness to it, and Allah suffices as Witness. 
4.167	And those who disbelieve and hinder in the path of Allah had indeed gone astray, straying far away.
4.168	Indeed, Allah will not forgive those who disbelieve and transgress, nor will He show them to the path.
4.169	Except the path of hell - they remain on it forever, and it is easy for Allah.
4.170    O humankind, the messenger has come to you with truth from your God; so believe - it is better for you. But if you reject, to Allah belongs all - in the skies and the earth. Allah is Knowing, Wise.
4.171    O, people of the Book! Exceed not your limits; say not of Allah but the Truth; verily Isa, the Messiah, son of Maryam is only the messenger of Allah, and is His word, which He placed in Maryam; and is the Soul from Him. So believe in Allah, and in His messenger; and, say not 'three' - stay clear; it is right for you, for there is only one God, Allah. He is pure from having a son unto Him; and, to Him is whatever in the skies and whatever is in the earth. And Allah suffices for a Guardian.
4.172    The messenger and the angels closer, shall not consider as degrading the obedience to Allah; whoever disdains obeisance to Him, and becomes arrogant, He will gather them to Him altogether.
4.173    Then those who believe and stay righteous, He will give them their goodly reward in full; and, He will provide them more of His bounties. And, as for those who are contemptuous and become arrogant, He will punish them with a severe torment; and, besides Allah, they shall neither find a friend nor a helper. 
4.174    O humankind, surely a clear sign has come to you from your God, and We have sent down to you a light, luminous.
4.175	So, whoever believes in Allah, and holds fast to Him, He makes them enter His Mercy and Grace; and, guides them in the way that leads up to Him.	
4.176    They ask concerning those with indirect heirs. Say: Allah ordains upon you thus: if a man dies having no children, but a sister, then her share of his duty is half. On the contrary, if a woman dies without children, then her brother - he takes full responsibility for what she has left behind; if he has two sisters, then their share is to bear two-thirds of his charge. And if she has kinsfolk males and females, then they shall shoulder her responsibilities as, - twice for men as that of women. Allah clarifies this that you shall not go astray. Allah is Knower of all things.





Chapter 5
Food Platter

5.1	O believers! Conform to your covenant; but that which is clarified, the cattle have been made lawful to you; and, desist from opting for extreme profits, while you strive for your purity. And verily, Allah commands only His goodwill.
5.2	O believers! Take them not to your interest; those who observe, opt for Allah's Signs, the sanctified period, the deeds of righteousness, and preserve the necessities of it; and, for their God's grace and gratification - and, those who opt for the esteemed house. If you have attained your purity, then you can seek the bounties. And the hatred you have for those, who have contempt towards your esteemed house, shall not lead you to exceed; help one another with goodwill, and fear for God; and, help not one another in sin and enmity. Fear Allah - for Allah is severe in punishing!(301)
5.3    	Forbidden to you are the carrion, the blood, the swine flesh, what has been hallowed to other than God, the dead by strangling, the dead by beating, the dead by falling, the gored to death, and the devoured of the wild - except that which you slaughtered. And the execrable is - that which is slaughtered on the altars; and the raffled off, by the divining arrows. This day, the disbelievers have lost the way from your guided path; so do not fear them; fear Me alone - and this day, I have perfected your righteous path; and I have fulfilled My bestow upon you - and for you, I have chosen "Peace" as the path. But if any of you without wrong intention forced to consume out of hunger, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Merciful.(302)
5.4	They ask you what is lawful to them. Say, "The lawful for you are: the pure good things; and, that which you obtained by what Allah has taught you - and eat of that which you hunted through your trained hounds and birds; but invoke Allah's Name over it; and fear Allah. Indeed Allah is swift in reckoning.
5.5    	This day all righteous things are made good to you; the food of the people of the Book is lawful to you, and your food is lawful unto them; and, the believing chaste women and the righteous women who were given the Book before you. Seeking chastity in marriage by offering dowry is allowed to you, and that you shall not desire them as mistresses or as adulteresses. But who so rejects the law, his deeds then will perish; and will be, hereafter, among the losers.   
5.6    	O you who believe! When you are to stand for the good deeds, then wash your faces and hands up to the elbows, and wipe your heads, and clean your feet up to the ankles - and if you are dirty then bathe. But when you are ill, or on a journey, or when you come from the toilet, or when you have had physical contact with the women, and if you do not find water, then touch the clean sand and with that wipe your face and arms. Allah intends not the hardship for you - but He wishes to purify you and complete His favour upon you that you shall be thankful to Him. 
5.7	And remember Allah's favour upon you; and when you were bound to His covenant you said: "We heard, and We are committed!" Fear Allah. Allah indeed knows all things in the hearts.
5.8	O you who believe! Stand firm witness to Allah and uphold justice; and, let not injustice influence you against a community, you hate. Deliver justice. That is close to Piety; and, fear Allah! Verily Allah knows well all you do.
5.9	Allah promises forgiveness and immense reward for those who believe and do good deeds.
5.10	And who so deny rejecting Our signs; they are the dwellers of hell.
5.11	O you who believe, remember Allah's grace upon you when He restrained the hands of a section that decided at harming you; so, fear Allah; and, let the believers put their trust only in Allah.
5.12	Allah indeed took the covenant from the descendants of Israel - and, We had raised twelve leaders from among them. And Allah said: "Surely I am with you; if you are steadfast in My remembrance, and spend from the pure things, and believe in the messengers, and extend all your help to them. And, give a beautiful loan in the name of Allah - surely I will forgive your sins, and cause you to enter the heavens beneath which rivers ever flow. Therefore after this, if any denies, he indeed, has fallen off the right course.(303)
5.13	Then when they broke the covenant We cursed them, and We made their hearts harden. They alter the meanings of Our verses from their intended Signs; and, they had forgotten a part of the admonition We had given them; therefore, except for a few, you shall continuously be witnessing the fulsomeness of most of the people; so forgive, and slight them aside. Allah indeed loves those who do good things.(304)
5.14	And We took covenant also from those who said: "Indeed we are Christians!" But they too had forgotten a part of the Signs given to them; so, We caused them to suffer lasting antagonism and animosity; and, Allah will expose them their works.(305)
5.15	O the people of the Book, "Verily Our messenger has come to you; he will make clear to you that which you cannot comprehend of the Book, passing over much; assuredly, there has come to you from your Allah the Book clear, luminous."(306)
5.16	With this Allah guides all those who seek His satisfaction, in the peaceful path and brings them out of the dark to the light by His will and guides them to the straight path. 
5.17	Verily those who say, "Son of Maryam, Isa is Allah," have become rejecters; say: who possesses the power against Allah if He wishes to destroy Isa, son of Maryam, and his mother and the entire population on the earth? To Allah is the reign in the skies, and the earth and over everything in between; He creates what He wishes. And He has power over all things.
5.18	The Jews and the Christians say: we are sons of Allah and His beloved; say: if so why should He punish you for your sins? Nay, you are humans, as of His creating. He forgives whom He pleases and punishes whom He pleases; to Him belongs the Kingdom of the skies and the earth and everything in between. And unto Him is the return.
5.19	O people of the Book, surely Our messenger has come to you; and, now that the Messenger has come to you that you shall not say, 'there has not been a Messenger in our period as a bringer of glad tiding or as a Warner.' So Our Messenger has indeed come to you with glad tidings and admonition. Allah has power over all things.
5.20	When Musa said to his people, "O my people, remember the favour of Allah upon you; He chose prophets among you and made you kings; and that He gave you which he gave not anyone - in all universe."
5.21	"Enter ye my people! the holy land Allah has destined for you; and, turn not on your backs; you will turn back only as losers."
5.22	They said, "O Musa, in it certainly is a formidable force; and, certainly we will never enter it until they leave it; and, if they go forth, surely we will enter it."
5.23	Allah bestows His grace upon two men of the people in fear; they both said: enter in upon them by the gate; if you enter by it, lo! you will be victorious; and if you are believers, upon Allah put your trust.
5.24	They said: O Musa, we never will enter it as long as they are in it; go ye and your God together to fight them; surely we will sit here. 
5.25	He said, "My God, I have no power except upon myself and my brother; so, distinguish between us and between the defiantly sinful people."
5.26	Said, "Then it is indeed forbidden to them for forty years; they will wander about on the earth; so grieve not for the people of the ungodly."
5.27    	Narrate the incidence of the two descendants of the Adam; when they both sacrificed, from one of them it is accepted, and not accepted from the other - said he, "I will surely kill you!" Said the other: verily, Allah accepts only from the God-fearing.(307)
5.28	"If you stretch your hands against me to kill me, I will not stretch my hands against you to kill you; I surely fear the God of the universes.(308)
5.29	"I do wish that you carry my sin with the burden of your sins; then you will be among the dwellers of hell." And that is the reward of those who do wrong.
5.30	Then his mind prompted him to kill his brother; so he killed him - and then, he became of the losers.
5.31	Then Allah sent a crow to show him how he could have hidden his brother's corpse; it dug the ground. He said, "Woe to me! Had I not been even as this crow that I could have hidden the body of my brother?" Then he was regretful.(309)
5.32	From time - We ordained upon the descendants of Israel that who so kills a soul, but for a soul, or for spreading mischief in the earth, it is as if he has killed all humankind; and who so preserves it, it is as if he has saved all humanity. And Our messengers surely came to them with clear Signs; despite that, most of them are flouters on the earth.
5.33	The Ruling on those who wage war against Allah and His messenger, and who spread corruption in the land is this: get killed, or hanged, or cut off their alternate hands and legs, or get exiled. That is the disgrace for them in this life; and, in the hereafter for them is a painful doom.
5.34	Except, of you who return before gaining authority over them - know that Allah indeed is Forgiving, Merciful.(310)
5.35	O you who believe, fear Allah and seek The Way to Him; and, strive in His Path, that May ye be victorious.
5.36	Surely the rejecters - even if they possess all that is in the earth, and as much again therewith, it will not be accepted to ransom them from the lasting affliction; and, for them is a painful doom.(311)
5.37	They would wish to come out of the fire, but they are not to get off it; they are to suffer the lasting pain.(312)
5.38	Thief - male or female as a recompense to their sins from Allah, cut their hands off of you. And Allah is Mighty, Wise.(313)
5.39	Verily, Allah forgives those who regret their evilness and correct their evil doings. Surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.(314)
5.40	Have not you observed- surely to Allah is the Kingdom of the skies and the earth? He punishes whom He will; and He forgives whom He will. Allah is Potent over everything.
5.41	O Messenger, worry not over those who say with their mouths, 'we believe,' while their hearts believe not; and, about those who hasten towards the disbelief - and the Jews: they are avid listeners to lies. And, they listen to the other folks who have not come to you. They change the scriptural environment of individuals and say, "Believe if the Law is thus, and reject otherwise." And whoever Allah decides to try, you shall never avail a thing for them from Allah; Allah does not wish to purify their hearts, and for them is the disgrace in this life; and, for them in the hereafter is a torment, mighty.
5.42	They are listeners of lies and devourers of the forbidden things; when they come to you judge between them or discredit them; if you discredit them, in no way shall they harm you; but if you try, judge equitably for Allah loves the just ones.
5.43	But how will they accept you as a judge? They have with them the Taurat wherein is the guidance of Allah. But then they reject it; they are not believers. 
5.44    	Verily, We sent down the Taurat; in it was the Guidance and Light; the Prophets submissive, guided the Jews by it. And those who abided by God, guided them by it, for it is binding upon those who possess the wisdom; and, as it is upon them to safeguard the Books, for them being the witness to the signs. And so, fear not men; fear Me alone. And sell not My signs for a paltry price. And the disbelievers are those who do not take to the guidance sent down by Allah.
5.45	In it We had decreed for them the avenging - the life for the life; the eye for the eye; the nose for the nose; the ear for the ear; the tooth for the tooth and the likeness for the wounds. So, if one forgives as charity, it is the expiation for his sins; and, who so fails to observe by what Allah has sent down, they indeed are the wicked. 
5.46	And We made Isa, son of Maryam, to fall in with all the prophets and testify the Taurat that was before him; and We gave him Injeel; in it was Guidance and Light. And it stood testimony to the Taurat that was before him; and, it is a guidance and portent for the pious.(315)
5.47	And let the people of Injeel follow as Allah has guided by it; and, whoever is not by Allah's way are the unjust.(316)
5.48	And We have sent down to you this Book in truth testifying the Book before it and securing it; so, judge between them by what Allah has ordained upon you; and, follow not their desires barring the truth that has come to you. And We have made for each of you individually an exclusive path and the means to it - had Allah willed He would have made you into a single nation; but, that He tests you in what He has given you; so, hasten towards the good. All of you have to return to Allah. And He would reveal to you that concerning which you were at variance.(317)
5.49    	And judge between them by what Allah reveals to you, and follow not their vain desires. And guard against them that they shall not seduce you away from some of what Allah has revealed unto you; but, if they turn away then, know that Allah intends to seize them for some of their sins. And clearly, most are sinful.
5.50	Do they desire the judgement of the ill-informed? Who is fairer in judgement than Allah for people committed to the truth?
5.51	O Believers, do not take for protectors the Jews and the Christians; some among them are protectors one to another. He among you who makes them as protectors is sure of them. Indeed, Allah guides not the evildoers.(318)
5.52	So you will see those in whose hearts are evil, hastening to them. They say: we fear if any bad omen shall befall us. But Allah may favour them with a victory or order from Him; and at that, they will regret what they had concealed in their hearts.
5.53	The believers will say: "Are these the people who swore by Allah the most earnest oaths they were sure with you?" All their deeds are lost, and they are the losers.
5.54	O you who believe, if any of you deviate from the straight path, then Allah will bring forth another generation He loves, and they will love Him. They will be lenient towards the believers, but stern with the disbelievers; and, they will strive justly in the path of Allah; and, they will not fear the torment of the oppressors. That is the Grace of Allah. He bestows this upon whom He pleases. Allah is Ample, Wise.
5.55	Your friends indeed are Allah and His messenger - and those who believe and remain steadfast in Allah's remembrance, and who give for purity and those who observe humility. 
5.56	The people of Allah are those who take Allah, and His messenger, and the believers for friends; verily, they are the victorious. 
5.57	O you who believe, do not take for friends from those who were given the Book before, who take your righteousness for play and fun; and, from the rejectors of righteousness. If you are believers, fear only Allah.
5.58	And when you call them to God, they take it for fun and play; it is because they are ignorant people.
5.59	Say: "O the people of the Book, it is not that you disregard us, but for our belief in Allah, and in that what is revealed to us, and upon that which was sent down before us; and surely, most among you are wrong-doers."
5.60	Say: "Shall I show you those who had received worse retribution from Allah? They are those whom Allah had cursed, and upon whom was His anger and made them apes and swine, and those who followed their vain desires - and they are the worst in situation, the ones who have gone astray from the even way."
5.61	When they come to you they say, "We believe." But indeed, they had come to you with rejection; and yes, they went forth with it. And Allah knows best what they were hiding.
5.62	And you will see many of them hasten in sin and transgression, and in devouring the forbidden things. Surely, evil is what they are doing.
5.63	Is it not that the God-conscious and the learned ones should have forbidden them from saying what is sinful and devouring the forbidden things? Surely evil is all they do.
5.64	The Jews say: Allah's hands are bound. Their own hands are fastened; they are cursed for saying this; Allah's hands are well outstretched; He wills what He wishes; surely that which is sent down upon you by your God increases transgression and denial in many of them. So, We cast amongst them repellence and execration till their end; and, every time they kindle the war-fire, Allah douses it; - they wander about the land spreading corruption; Allah loves not the corruptors.
5.65	And had they who have the Book believed therein and feared, We certainly would have forgiven them their sins, and surely admitted them into paradise.
5.66	And had they followed the Taurat and Injeel, and that which is sent down upon them from their God, they would have been in the liveliness from the heavens above them, and from below their feet; some among them take to the guidance while most are inclined to evil works.
5.67	O Messenger! Deliver what is revealed to you by your God; and if you do not do so, it is not that you had stood by the message; Allah will protect you from the people; verily, Allah will not guide people, the rejecting.
5.68	Say: "O people of the Book, until and unless you follow the Taurat, the Injeel and that which has been sent down to you from your God, you belong nowhere." And, that which is revealed to you certainly fuels the rebellion and transgression in many of them; so, worry not for the people in denial.
5.69	Indeed those who are Believers - from among the believers, the Jews, the Safieen and the Christians, - believe in Allah and the Last Day, and stand for righteousness; for them, there is no fear, nor grief.
5.70	We took the covenant from the descendants of Israel, and We sent messengers to them; but, whensoever there came to them a messenger delivering that their minds desire not, they denied some, and they slew some.
5.71	And they thought there should be no trial, and so they became blind and deaf - then, Allah turned to them. But most of them remained blind and deaf; and, Allah is Seer of all they do.
5.72	Certainly disbelievers are they who say, "Indeed Allah, - He is Isa, son of Maryam." But said the Messiah, "O children of Israel, Call on only Allah, my God and your God; and, he who makes the association to Allah, surely, Allah has the paradise forbidden for him, and his shelter is hell - there is not a helper for the wrong doers.
5.73	Certainly disbelievers are they who say: Allah is the third of Three. But there is no other God but one God; and, if they keep not away from saying so, surely, a painful punishment shall seize the rejecters among them.
5.74	Will they not turn in repentance to Allah, and seek His forgiveness? And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
5.75	Isa, son of Maryam, is none but a messenger; and indeed, Messengers passed away before him; and, his mother was truthful, and they both fed them with food. Behold, how we made clear Our Signs to them, and behold, how they are turned away.
5.76	Say: Do you call upon besides Allah which has no power to cause you harm or good? Allah, He is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
5.77	Say: O ye who possess the Book, transgress not in your life saying other than the Truth, and follow not the vain desires of people, certainly who went astray before you; they misguided many of them while they were in error themselves. 
5.78	Cursed are those who became disbelievers from among the descendants of Israel by the tongues of Dawud and Isa, son of Maryam, for their deviation and transgression.
5.79	Nor did they forbid one another from committing sinful acts; verily, vile was what they used to do.
5.80	You will find many of them in company with the disbelievers; evil is that they had forwarded to their account; and, Allah's wrath is upon them, and they would abide in agony forever.
5.81	And had they believed in Allah, in the Prophet, and in that which is revealed to him, they would not have been in their company; yet most of them are sinners. 
5.82	Surely you will find the Jews and those who associate others with God, as the bitterest enemies to the believers; and, you will find the nearest in affection to the believers are they who say: "Truly we are Christians!" It is because among them are the priests, and monks; and, they are not proud.
5.83	And when they listen to what is revealed to the messenger, their eyes will overflow with tears because they realised the Truth. They will say: Our God, we believed. Write us among the witnesses.(319)
5.84	And, "Lo! Why should we not believe in Allah, and the Truth that has come to us? And we wish our God, joins us with the righteous."
5.85	Allah rewards them for what they say,  with the paradise, beneath which the rivers flow, and wherein they will abide forever; and, that is the reward for those who do good.
5.86	But those who reject and deny Our Signs, unquestionably, they are the inmates of hell.
5.87	O you who believe, make not as forbidden that which Allah had made lawful to you as good, and do not transgress. Surely, Allah does not love the transgressors.
5.88	And make use of the right provisions Allah has made lawful to you; and, as believers in Him, fear only Allah.
5.89	Allah will not hold you liable for your slip in your promises but will hold you guilty for such bonds as you have made by oaths. Expiation to this is: feeding ten needy, of food, the average of what you would feed your family; or provide them clothes; or free a bondman. If one does not have the means - he shall fast for three days. But when you break your promises this is the compensation. Honour your words! Thus Allah reveals His Signs to you that you may show thanks.  
5.90	O ye who believe, indeed the disgusting works of Shaitan are liquor, gambling, stone-altars and divining arrows - avoid these that you will be victorious.
5.91	Shaitan desires only to cause animosity and hatred amongst you through liquor and gambling, and to bar you from remembering Allah and submitting to Him; so will you not desist?
5.92	And obey Allah and obey the Messenger; and be aware - for if you slight it, know that upon Our Messenger is to deliver clear. 
5.93    	The believers - if they do good and guard themselves; and, strengthen their belief, and do good and protect themselves; and, furthering in their faith with piety do virtuous deeds - there is no sin unto them for what they had tasted of the forbidden. Allah loves those who are righteous.
5.94	O you who believe! Allah will surely test you with what you hunt at ease by your hands and spear(320) that Allah makes known those who fear Him in secret. And those  who transgress after this, they shall suffer a painful torment. 
5.95	O ye who believe, hunt not when you seek purity to your soul; but, if any of you hunt wantonly, then he shall compensate from cattle an equivalent of what he killed - let two just among you judge as to the ruling; and this, strengthen your ankles in the journey. Or the expiation is feeding the poor, or observe compensatory fasting to experience his flaw - Allah has forgiven the past. But whoever returns and repeats, Allah is Punishing. And Allah is the Mighty, the Avenging.
5.96	It is made lawful for you to hunt in the sea, that which is useful to you and the voyagers and to eat thereof. But it is unlawful for you, overtaking on the land, at times when you seek purity for your soul. So fear Allah, and unto Him you will be gathered.(321)
5.97	Allah has made for man, his resting place, a Holy home to stand firm - and sacred months, generous offerings and beautiful things; thus - Allah assures you that He is the Knower of all things in the skies and in the earth; surely Allah is the Knower of all things.
5.98	Know that Allah is severe in retribution; and that Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
5.99 	Upon the messenger is but to deliver; and, Allah knows what you reveal and what you conceal.
5.100	Say: Though the prevalence of evil might surprise you, evil and good are not equal. So men of understanding, fear Allah and so you will be victorious.
5.101    O ye who believe, question not unnecessarily; if you are answered, it might be harmful to you, but when the demand necessitates, the signs of Quran will be a revelation to you; Allah pardons this. And Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing.
5.102	Indeed a people before you were intent upon questioning, then, they rejected therein.
5.103	Allah has not caused such as 'Bahira, Sayiba, Vaseela, Haami - but it is the deniers who imagine lies against Allah. And most of them are ignorant.
5.104	And when said to them: "Come to what Allah has revealed and to the Messenger, they say: "It suffices us that upon which we found our forefathers. What, even when their forefathers were not of understanding and lacked in Guidance?
5.105	O ye who believe, protect yourself; if you follow the Guidance, the misguided cannot harm you a trifle; and, unto Allah shall you all return; then, He will inform you of what you used to do.
5.106	O ye who believe, if any of you knows your death, approaching - let there be two just witnesses among you when you bequeath, or when you sense death while upon a journey, let there be two witnesses who are not of you. If you are apprehensive, trust in Allah concerning the two, and so make them both swear by Allah: "By what we said, we do not desire any of the bequeath, even though they are our relations, we have not concealed anything concerning what we swore by Allah. And, had we done so, certainly we would be the sinners."
5.107	If you come to know they had become sinners, then two of the kinsfolk shall come in their place and claim for the bequeathed, and let them swear by Allah and say: "Our witness is more truthful than the witness of the two; we have not transgressed, lest we would be the transgressors."
5.108	This is the easy way to cause to bring their witness appropriately and in fear that their witnesses would be taken after the oaths - heed fearing Allah, for Allah does not guide the transgressors. 
5.109	On the day when Allah gathers the Messengers, He will say: "What were you answered?" They will say: "We know not; surely You are the Knower of all secrets."
5.110    Then Allah will say: "O Isa, son of Maryam! Remember My grace upon you and your mother; helping you with the Pure Soul: caused you to speak to men while in the cradle and when you reached adulthood. And I gave you the Book and the Wisdom and taught you Taurat and Injeel. And when you moulded a bird from clay by My leave and breathed into it, it became a bird by My leave. And when you cured, of My leave the born blind and the leper, and when you brought forth the dead by My leave. And that I dithered them, when you brought clear signs to the descendants of Israel, the deniers among them said: "This is nothing but manifest sorcery!"
5.111	When I gave them the message to believe in Me and My messenger, they said, "We believed, and indeed, be witness to that we are Muslims - submitters to the peace."
5.112	When the followers said, "O Isa, son of Maryam, can your God make a platter descend upon us from the sky?" He said, "Fear Allah if you are believers."(322)
5.113	They said: "We wish to satisfy our hearts by eating thereof, and know for sure that you spoke the Truth to us and that we wish to be witnesses to it."(323)
5.114	Isa, son of Maryam said, "O our God Allah! Send down on us a platter; it will be a grand sign from You and a food festival for us, and to our fathers, and to our descendants; and fulfil our needs; and, you are the best in fulfilling our provisions."(324)
5.115	Allah said, "Surely I will send it down to you, but after this who so of you become a denier, I will indeed seize him with a torment that I had never seized anyone with, in the world."	    
5.116	And when Allah will say, "O Isa, son of Maryam, did you say to people, 'you take me, and my mother as two gods besides Allah?'" He said, "You are the Most-Pure! I am not to say to which I have no right. Had I said it, surely You are the Knower. You know what I have in my heart, and I do not know what You know; indeed, You are the Knower of all secrets."
5.117	"As You had commanded me, I said not to them but 'surrender to Allah, my God and your God; and I was watchful over them as long as I was with them. And after You captured my soul, You were watchful over them; and, You are the Witness over all things."
5.118	"If You are to punish them, they are surely Your slaves; and if You forgive them, surely You are Mighty, Wise."
5.119	Allah said: "This Day is the rewarding day for the truthful for their truth; to them are the paradises beneath which the rivers flow wherein they abide. Allah is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him - this is the victory, grand."
5.120	The realm of skies and the earth, and everything in them belongs to Allah. He has Power over all things.
Chapter 6
The Cattle

6.1	All glory be to Allah; He created the skies and the earth and appointed the darkness and the light; yet, the rejecters make them equals to Him.(325)
6.2	He, it is who created you from the clay, and determined a period; and, with Him is the time fixed; yet, you doubt.(326)
6.3	And He is Allah, in the skies and the earth; and, He knows what you conceal and what you reveal, and He knows all that you earn.(327)
6.4	Not a Sign of the Revelations of their God comes to them, but they turn away from it.(328)
6.5	So, they deny when the Truth has come to them.But what is to reach them soon is what they are mocking.(329)
6.6    	Have they not beheld how many a nation We had destroyed before them? We gave them the luxuries that We have not provided you with on the earth; and, We sent the sky on them in showers, and made rivers flow beneath them. Then, because of their inequities, we destroyed them; and, after them, We caused generations to follow them.
6.7    	If We send down to you a Scripture in papers, and even when they verify touching it, the rejecters will say, "It is nought but plain magic".
6.8	They say: "Should there not be an angel sent down upon him?" Had We sent down an angel the matters would have ended, and they would not have been given the least chance.
6.9    	Even if We are to send down an angel, We indeed would have made him in human form; then, We would have certainly confused you as you used to confuse.
6.10	And indeed, scoffed at were the messengers before you; in the end, whatever they were ridiculing, surrounded the mockers.
6.11	Say: Journey in the land and behold how was the end of them that cried lies.(330)
6.12	Say: unto who belongs, which are in the skies and the earth? Say: Unto Allah. He has made Mercy His office. Verily He will gather you all on the Last Day, and there is no doubt in it; but, those who had lost themselves shall not believe.(331)
6.13	And unto Him belongs that which lives by night and by day; He is Hearing, Knowing.(332)
6.14	Say: will I take for Protector other than Allah who created the skies and the earth; He who feeds and is not fed? And say: I am commanded to be the believer first, and be not of the associators.
6.15	Say: if I defy my God, indeed I fear the punishment of a Mighty Day.
6.16	Whoever is averted from the pain of that agonising day, certainly He has shown him Mercy; a clear victory, this.
6.17	If Allah has allowed you distress, none but He can remove it; and if He bestows you with good, He has power over all things.
6.18	He is the subjugator of His bondsmen; and He is Wise, Knowing.
6.19    	Say: Which is of most weight in testimony? And say: Allah is Witness between you and me; this Quran is bestowed upon me through wahi - inspiration thereby to warn you, and those who knew it. Do you have proof there are deities besides Allah? Say: I bear no witness; verily He is the only God; and, assuredly I am quit of that, you associate."(333)
6.20	Those to whom We have bestowed the Book, they recognize him as they know their sons; but they who have lost themselves, would not believe.
6.21    	And who is more unjust than one who invents lies against Allah or who rejects His Signs; evidently, the unjust will never succeed.
6.22	On that day when We gather them, We shall say to those who set up partners to Us, "Where are those whom you associated with Me?"
6.23	Their answer will be none other than the lie: "By Allah, our God, we had never been associators."
6.24	Behold, how they lie against them; and, all that they fabricated will vanish.
6.25    	Of them some hear you - but, We placed coverings over their hearts and caused deafness in their ears lest they will understand it. And, even when they see all the Signs, will not believe them; and if they come to you they will argue with you;  and the rejecters will say, 'these are nothing but the apologues of men of old'.
6.26	And they forbid it; and, keep far from it; they destroy them, but they know not. 
6.27	And if you see them brought by the fire, they will say: "Oh, would that we might return, then we deny not the Signs of our God, but that we would be among the believers."
6.28	Nay. But what they concealed before has come to them; even if they were returned, certainly they would resort to the same that are forbidden to them; and, they are liars indeed.
6.29	And they say, "There is only our worldly life, and we will not be raised."
6.30	If you could behold them when they are stationed before their God, He would say to them, "Is this not true?" They will say, "Yes, by our God!" He will say, "Suffer for your rejection."
6.31	Surely in loss are they who rejected the meeting with Allah; so, when the Day of suffering touches them of a sudden, they will say, "Our grief, that we were indifferent!" And they will bear the burden on their backs; lo, evil is what they bear.	
6.32	Your living is none other than fun and vanity; surely, for the God-fearing, the life ahead is far more beautiful. Will you then not understand? 
6.33	Indeed We know your anguish concerning what they say; they surely do not disregard you; but lo, the wicked confute the very signs of Allah.
6.34	And indeed denied were the messengers before you, but they endured their rejection and ill-treatment until Our help came to them; none shall change the word of Allah; and, there has certainly come to you news concerning the messengers.
6.35	If their rejection causes you much apprehension, then, enter into the depth of the earth by a tunnel or ascend to the sky by a ladder and bring a sign unto them, but if Allah so wishes, surely He will gather them all in the straight path. So do not become ignorant.
6.36	Those who lend ears will receive; as to the dead, Allah will raise them up, and unto Him they will be returned.	
6.37	They say, "Shall not there be a sign sent down upon him from his God?" Say: verily, Allah is Potent to send down a sign; yet, most do not understand.
6.38	And not any animal on the earth, nor a bird flying on its wings but beings like you; nothing is left out in the Book; and, they will be gathered unto their God.
6.39	Those who deny Our Signs are akin to the deaf and dumb in the deep dark; Allah sends astray whom He will, and guides whom He will.
6.40	Say: "If Allah's punishment has touched you; or His time has reached you - have you seen - will you call upon, but Allah, if you are truthful?"	
6.41	Nay. You will call upon Him alone; then if He so wills, He would remove that for which you did turn to Him; and, you will forget all things you associated with Him.
6.42	And indeed, We sent to the people before you; and We seized them with diseases and poverty - perchance they shall be humble.
6.43	Should they not have shown humility when chastisement from Us seized them? But their hearts hardened; Shaitan made it fair-seeming to them that which they were doing.
6.44	So when they forgot their reminders, We opened up for them the gates of all things; and, while they were in sheer joyousness from what they were given, We caught them unawares; then lo, they became hopeless.
6.45	Thus the transgressors were uprooted; all praise be to Allah, the God of the worlds.
6.46	Say: "Did you not see if Allah sets deafness in you, and takes away the sight and seals your hearts - which God besides Allah will return them to you?" Behold, how We make plain the Signs. But they deny.
6.47	Say: "Have you seen - will any but the transgressors be destroyed if Allah's punishment reaches you suddenly or with forewarning?"   
6..48	And We have not sent messengers but as the giver of glad tiding and as a warner; so, those who believe and reform, they will neither fear nor grieve.
6.49	But those who reject Our Signs, the torment will afflict them for what they used to disobey.
6.50	Say: "I do not say to you I possess Allah's bounties; and I know not the secrets, nor do I say to you 'I am an angel'; and, I do not follow except that which is inspired into me." And say: "Are the blind and those who see equal? Don't you then reflect?" 
6.51	 And warn with it those who fear their being brought before their God - so that they become God-fearing; and, besides Him, there is none as a Protector nor as an interceder. 
6.52	And slight them not who remember their God morning and evening, seeking His satisfaction; not on you is their account; and not on them is your account; therefore, if you slight them, you will be among the wrong doers. 
6.53	We thus tested some with some others that they should say, "Is it upon these have Allah bestowed grace amongst us?" Is it not that Allah knows well the grateful?
6.54    	And when those who stand by Our Signs come to you, say, "Peace be upon you!" Your God has ordained upon Himself Mercy. If any of you commit a sin by ignorance and after that repents and reforms himself, surely He forgives and is merciful to him.
6.55	We thus expound Our Signs to show clearly, the way of the sinners.
6.56	Say: verily I am forbidden to call on what you call on besides Allah. And say: I will not follow your desires; then, I will surely be off the course and I will cease to be among the guided.
6.57	Say: surely, I am upon the evident guidance of my God; but you deny it; and, about that which you hasten is not in my authority; all command is with but Allah. He tells the Truth; and, He is the High of judges.
6.58	Say: if it were with me to which you hasten me, things would have been long settled between me and you; and, Allah knows best the unjust.
6.59    	And with Him are the ways to secrecy; none but He knows them; and, He knows what is in the earth and the sea; and, not a leaf falls, but He knows it. And it is not without a clear inscription in His Book, even a seed - fresh or dry in the depth of the earth.
6.60	He causes you to die by night; and, He knows all that you do by day; and, He raises you up in the morning to complete your prescribed period; then, your return is unto Him. And then He would inform you about what you used to do.
6.61	And He controls His bondsmen; and, He sends over you, the protectors; and, when the Hour reaches any of you, our messengers capture his soul - they never miss. 
6.62    	Then they will be brought before Allah, their True Protector; surely, His is the judgement; and, He is the swiftest in the reckoning.
6.63    	Say: while you are in the darkness of land and sea - who delivers you when you say, 'surely we will be grateful if we are saved from this', calling upon Him in humility, and in secrecy?
6.64	Say: Allah delivers you from this, and from all adversities; then you assign associates.
6.65	Say: He is able to send forth adversities upon you from above or from below your feet; or that He should confuse you in party strife, and make you taste the vengeance one of another - lo and behold, how we explain Our Signs that they may understand.
6.66	Say: While this is the Truth, your people deny it; so I have no charge over you.
6.67	To each is a term fixed; soon will you know.
6.68	Distance away from those whom you find contending Our Signs; for, they are drowned in their contumacies - the 'hadiths'; and, if shaitan has made you forget, then when you become aware, sit not with them - the unjust.
6.69	There is nothing upon the God-fearing concerning their account; but, it is upon them to give warning so that they might fear.
6.70    	And let them alone who have taken their lives for sport and fun, and whom this deceptive life has overpowered; but, admonish them that each will face the hazards of his evil. And for them there is none but Allah as a Protector or as an interceder; and, all their ransoms will be denied; they have destroyed them with their deeds. And for their denial, their reward is scalding water and painful torment. 
6.71	Say: Shall we call on that which can do neither good or bad to us, other than Allah? And that we shall turn about on our heels after Allah has guided us? If so, we would be like one who has friends and say, 'come to us' - to the straight path, but who wanders bewildered because shaitan led him astray. And say: Allah's guidance is the Guidance; and, we are ordained to submit to the God of the worlds. 
6.72	Stand by the Guidance; fear Him - it is unto Him you will be gathered. 
6.73	He created the skies and the earth in Truth; and, the moment He says to it Be! it is; His word is the Truth, and His will be the sovereignty on the Hour of His word aired; He knows what is hidden and what is manifest. He is All-Wise, All-Knowing.(334)
6.74	And when Ibrahim said to His father Azar, "Do you take idols as deities? Lo! I see you and your people in manifest error."	
6.75	And We showed Ibrahim the ruling of the skies and the earth, so He is sure, thus:(335)
6.76	So, when the night covered him, he saw the Star; he said, "This is my God!" But when it set, he said: "I love not that sets."
6.77	When he saw the Moon rising, he said: "This is my God!" Then when it set, he said: if my God does not Guide, sure I will be misguided!
6.78	When he saw the Sun rising, he said: "This is my God; this is the biggest!" And when it set too, he said: "O my people, Indeed I have rejected all that you associate with God.(336)
6.79	"I have firmly turned to Him who created the skies and the earth; I will not be among the idol-worshippers."
6.80	And his people argued with him. He said, "Do you argue with me about Allah; undoubtedly He has guided me aright, and I fear not what you associate with Him - save a thing God wills. My God surrounds all things with His wisdom; do not you behold?"
6.81	And you did not fear, assigning partners to Allah when He has not sent down any evidence - so, how shall I fear that which you associated? Which of the two parties has more right to have secured life, if you know?
6.82	Those who believed and did not undermine it with disbelief for them is Peace; and, they are the guided.
6.83	And these are Our Signs; We gave these to Ibrahim against his people. We raise the standards of whom We please. Surely your God is Wise, All-Knowing.
6.84	And We gave him Ishaq and Yaqub, and conducted them all in righteousness; and, before this, We did guide Nuh, and from his descendants - Dawud, Sulaiman, Ayyub, Yusuf, Musa and Harun. And thus do We reward those who are righteous.
6.85	And the righteous are Zachariah, Yahya, Isa and Ilyas.
6.86	And Ismail, Alyasau, Yunus and Lut - We raised them all, high above all. 
6.87	And, We chose and guided from their forefathers, from their descendants, and from their brothers.
6.88	This is the guidance of Allah, and He guides by this, whom He will of His bondsmen; if they ever associate, all that they did will become a vanity.
6.89	To such We gave the Book, the Wisdom, and the Prophethood; so, if they reject therein, We shall undoubtedly entrust this to a generation who will not disbelieve therein.
6.90	Allah guided them all; so, follow their guidance. Say: "I seek of you naught, aught in return; this is, but a glad tiding to the people of the worlds."
6.91	They have not glorified Allah in Truth, for they say: "Allah sent not a revelation to anyone." Say, "Who sent down to Musa, the Luminous Scripture, the Guidance of humanity? And you ripped a few parts of it,  made into scrolls and scripts while concealing a greater part therein. And you were inspired by all those which you and your ascendants have been ignorant of - say: "From Allah!" Nevertheless, leave them drowned in their contumacy.(337)
6.92	And We have sent down this Book enriched, and as the witness to that which are before it that you may warn the people in the capitals and those surrounding it; whoever believes in the Hour next, will believe; and, they will abide, prayerfully.
6.93	And who is more wicked than he who invents a lie against Allah, or he who says, 'I have received 'Revelation' when he is not 'inspired' of aught'; or he who says, "I will send down too as Allah has sent down?" If you could see such wickedness in the agonising grip of death, the angels would stretch out both their hands and say, "Deliver up your lives! this day you will be awarded disgraceful doom; it is because you were saying untruth about Allah, waxing pride against His Signs."
6.94	And truly you have come to us alone as We created you the first time; and, you threw behind your backs all niceties We bestowed on you; and, We behold not your allies with you - whom you thought would intercede for you; indeed, connections between you have severed; and, all your beliefs have become void.
6.95	Indeed Allah cleaves open the seeds and the seedlings; He brings forth life from the dead, and He brings forth death from the living. He is Allah; how then do you deviate?(338)
6.96	He cleaves the daybreak, and He created the night for peace; and, the sun and the moon to determine periods; such is the design of All-Powerful, Most Wise. 
6.97	And He created for you, the stars, and you determine the direction in the dark of the land and the sea; certainly, We explain the Signs to the men of understanding.
6.98	And He created you from one soul, then made it stay, and then delivered it; verily, We have made the Signs clear to those who ponder.
6.99    	And it is He who sends down water from the sky, and We bring forth every kind of produce; then We bring out from it the greenery, therein We arrange thick-clustered grains. And there are the bunches of dates, hanging low from the bracts of the date-palm, and the gardens of grapes, the pomegranates similar and dissimilar, and olives. And behold ye! How their fruits appear and ripen - herein are the Signs indeed for those who believe.(339)
6.100	Yet, they associate jinns to Allah; but it is He who has created them; But without knowledge, they falsely attribute to Him sons and daughters - Most Pure, and Most High is He, from what they describe of Him.
6.101	The Originator of the skies and the earth - while He is free of any companion, a son for Him? And He created everything; and, He is of everything, the Knower.
6.102	Allah is He! - your God; there is no God but He, the Creator of everything; so surrender to Him; and over everything, He is the Guardian. 
6.103	Sights cannot reach Him, but He reaches the vision - He is Subtle, Knowing.
6.104	"Verily from your God has come to you the evident Sign. So whoever sees, it is for his good, and whoever is blind, it is his peril - I am not a protector over you."
6.105	That they may say, 'you are tutored' - and thus We cause the Signs, crystal, for a people who know.
6.106	Follow only that which is revealed to you from your God as an absolute feel; none but He is the Guide; shun those who associate.
6.107	And had Allah willed they would not have set up partners; We have not assigned you as a protector over them; neither are you a guardian over them.(340)
6.108	And abuse not what they call upon other than Allah lest they will insult Allah without a thought - thus We have made such deeds fair-seeming to every community; their return is unto their God; then He will inform them of what they used to do.(341)
6.109	And swearing a solemn oath by Allah they say, "If a Sign comes to us surely we will be believers." Say: All Signs are with Allah; and what would inform you on the day when it comes, they will not believe?
6.110	And We will turn away their hearts and their sights - that they will stay unbelieving as at first, and We will leave them in the lurch, wandering.
6.111	Even if We had sent down the angels to them, and make the dead speak to them, and bring before their very eyes all things, they would not believe unless Allah wills - for most of them are ignorant.(342)
6.112	Thus unto every prophet, We had made enemies - Shaitans from the men and jinns; that some of them shall deceive some others, advancing alluring promises. Had your God willed they would not have indulged in it; therefore, shun them and their lies. 
6.113	And that the hearts of the deniers in the last day shall adhere to, and that they may take delight therein - and that they shall plunge in what they were indulging.
6.114	Would I search for a Judge besides Allah? He sent you the Book, the Revelation, and to whom We had bestowed with the distinguishment shall find that this is the Truth from your God. Therefore do not be of the doubters. 
6.115	And the Revelation of your God is complete with the Truth and Justice, and there is none to change His Revelation. He is All-Ears, Knows All.
6.116	And if you were to heed the majority on the earth, they will lead you astray from the path of Allah; they follow, but conjecture, and they only imagine.  
6.117 	Your God Knows best who strays away from His way, and He knows very well the right-guided.
6.118	So, remember the Name of Allah while eating, if you believe in His Signs.
6.119	And what prevents you from food, while reminding you of Allah's Names? And except when you are forced to, Allah has clarified to you that which are forbidden - but most, driven by their desires, stray away in ignorance; indeed, your God knows the transgressors.
6.120	And stay clear from the sins, manifest and secret; indeed, whoever earns the sins will be rewarded for that they used to acquire.
6.121	And eat not a thing without remembering the Name of Allah; it is a sin indeed; indeed, shaitans induce their allies to argue with you - and if you submit to them, then, surely you too are of the associators.(343) 
6.122	And is the one dead, to whom We had given the life and the Light, and who lives by it among the people, like another who is in the dark, and comes forth not from it - Thus, to the deniers, We had made their works pleasing to them.(344)
6.123	And thus We have made the leaders, of the criminals, in every city so that they create mischief therein; their devising is against themselves, but they do not understand.
6.124	And when a Sign comes to them they say: "We will not believe unless a Sign is given to us as had been given to the messengers of Allah." Allah knows well where He shall cause His message to descend, and as to the sinners, because of their evil plots - is humiliation and severe torment from Allah. 
6.125	So whoever wishes, Allah to guide him, He expands his heart for peace; and, whom He leaves astray, He causes his chest to constrict as happens to one who climbs to the sky - thus Allah causes hardship for those who do not believe.
6.126	This is the straight path of your God - and surely, We have made the Signs clear to those who heed.
6.127	For them from their God is a peaceful life - and, He is their Protector for the deeds they used to do.  
6.128	On the day when He gathers them all, "O people of the Jinn! Have you not enticed many among the men?" Among mankind, their friends will say, "Our God, some of us have benefited from some of us, and we have reached Your appointed time for us." He will say: hell is your abode; unless Allah wills, you will abide therein. Indeed, your God is All-Wise, All-Knowing.(345)
6.129	And thus do We make some among the sinners, friends to some others because of what they used to do.
6.130	O people of jinn and men, have not there been unto you messengers from among you to recite to you My Signs, and to warn you about the meeting of this day?" They will say, "Yes. We stand witness, ourselves" - this is because the worldly life has deceived them - and they will bear witness against themselves for their unbelief.  
6.131    This is because your God does not destroy a town of the criminals for their infamy, without warning its people.(346)
6.132    And each has a degree according to his striving, and your God is not negligent of what they endeavour at.
6.133    Your God is Free of Need, Merciful - if He wishes, He will put you away; and, replace a people after you whom He wills, just as He made you possess from the other's descendants. 
6.134	Surely what you are promised will come to pass, and you cannot halt it.
6.135	Say: O my people! Stay on in your disposition, and I will be upon mine; then, you will know whose decision shall finally be rewarding; indeed, the unjust will never succeed.
6.136	And they apportioned a share for Allah from what He created of the produce and cattle; they say, "This is for Allah, and this is for our deities." The shares they assign to their deities does not reach Allah, but that which Allah shares, reaches their deities." What they conclude is evil.
6.137	Likewise, to many of the idolaters, their deities have made the killing of their own children pleasing to them; they have destroyed them and ditched their path; and, had Allah willed they would not have done so; so, you stay away from them and their falsities.
6.138	And they say that the crops and the livestocks are forbidden to those but to whom they wish, and that certain cattle are forbidden to be used for riding or for carrying loads; and, casting lie on Allah, say they: there are such livestocks upon which Allah's name should not be invoked - Allah will reward them for their falsities.(347)
6.139	And they say: the foetuses of this livestock are exclusively for our male members, and it is forbidden for our womenfolk - if they were dead-born, they all have their shares therein. Allah will reward them for what they say. Surely He is All-Wise, All-Knowing. 
6.140	Verily, lost are they who killed their children in ignorant foolishness, and forbid them that which Allah had allowed them, lying against Allah; verily, they had gone astray - they are not guided.
6.141    And it is He who created the greens trellised and other than trellised, and the gardens of date-palms, and the palatable vegetations and the crops, and the olives, and the pomegranates, in likes and alikeness - if therein is the pleasantness for you, relish thereof. And when you harvest leave a portion in it; and be not exorbitant for He indeed loves not the excessive.(348)
6.142	And of the livestock some for burdens, some for food; eat of what Allah has provided you, and follow not the footsteps of Shaitans - for he is to you an open enemy.
6.143	There are eight varieties - two of sheep, two of goats - has He forbidden the males of these? Or their females? Or the foetuses in the females of the two? Say: if you are truthful, then bring me the proof.
6.144	And two of camels, two of cows? And say: Has He forbidden the males of these? Or the females of these? Or the foetuses in the females of these two? Or were you the witness when Allah commanded thus? Who is more unjust than he who without proof, invent lies against Allah so that the people have deviated? And surely, Allah will not guide the transgressors.
6.145	Say: I do not find in what is revealed to be forbidden to eat - except the dead animals, the pouring blood, and the swine flesh - indeed, they are impure - and also that upon which is invoked other than the Names of Allah, for it is sinful. But if one eats due to force and with no sinful rebellion in him - your God indeed is Oft-Relenting, Most Merciful.(349)
6.146   And We had forbidden to the Jews all having the claws, and We had prohibited them the fats of the sheep and the cow, except the fat sticking to the back, abdomen and the bones - We recompensed them for their excessiveness - plainly We say the Truth.  
6.147	But if they belie you then say, "Your God has Expansive Mercy; but not will His anger be turned away from a sinful people."
6.148	Those who set up partners to Allah will say: "Had Allah willed neither we, nor our forefathers would have associated, nor would we have forbidden anything" - thus were the disavowal of those who were before them until Our punishment came. Say: "Do you have any proof to adduce for us?  You follow but surmising."
6.149	Say: with Allah is the gratifying proof; Had He willed, verily, He would have guided you all.	
6.150	Say: bring your witnesses to give witness to your claim that Allah indeed had prohibited this; if they assert, then do not aver with them - follow not the vanities of those who belie Our Signs and believe not in the Last Hour - for it is them who set up partners to their God.
 6.151	Say: come! I will reveal what your God has forbidden to you - 'do not take anything as equal to Him, and do good to your parents; and, do not kill your children fearing poverty - We provide food for you and for them. Do not approach the shamelessness openly or secretly, and take not life of a soul that Allah has prohibited, except by way of law and justice - thus does He teach you that you may know'.(350)
6.152	And do not get near the wealth of an orphan except in a very fair manner until he reaches his maturity and, fill up your measure and weight with justice. We test not one except to his capacity; and when you speak, be just even if he is your dear one - and fulfil the covenant of Allah - this is the commandment upon you that you may remember. 
6.153	And this is My straight path! So follow this; and, follow not beside this - they will scatter you from His Way. He thus commands you that you will become pious. 
6.154	Moreover, We gave Musa the Book, to complete upon those who do good, wherein is the revelation about everything - it is the righteousness and a Grace - haply they shall believe in the meeting with their God.
6.155	And this is the Book; We sent it down, the most Blessed - so follow this, and fear; you will be given Mercy.(351)
6.156	Lest you should say, "The Book was sent only to the two people before us - and truly we were ignorant of what the Reading was;
6.157	Or, lest you say, "If a Book had been sent down upon us, we would have been more righteous than they." Therefore from your God has come a Book clear, a Guidance and Mercy. Who is more unjust than he, who rejects Allah's Signs and turns away? who so turns away from Our Signs, because of their turning away, We will recompense them with a penalty, severe. 
6.158   Do they expect any but the angels should come to them, or that your God shall come, or a part of the promises of your God should reach? On the Day when some of the assurances of your God reaches, those who were in disbelief there tofore, or those who believed but had not earned any good - their belief shall avail them nought. Say: you expect; indeed, we too expect! 
6.159	Indeed those who have fallen into schisms from their straight path, you are not of them in anything - their affair is with Allah, Who will tell them what they used to do. 
6.160	Whoever brings a good, he would be recompensed ten times the like of it, and whoever brings an evil then he will not be rewarded except with the like of it - and, they will not be wronged.
6.161	Say: "Certainly my God has guided me upon the right course - a very decisive path, and it is Ibrahim's righteous life; and, he was not of the associators;
6.162	Say: "Verily my remembrance of God, my sacrifices, my life and my death - belong only to Allah, the God of the worlds; 
6.163   "There are no associations to Him - and I, as a first, bow to my Command, in Peace."  
6.164	Say: "Will I take as God any besides Allah? He is the God of all things - each earns his burden only to his own account, nor any soul laden bears another's load; and then, your return is unto your God. He would then inform you of that whereon you were at variance."  
6.165	He made you inherit the world to test you with what He had bestowed upon you, and He raised some of you in degrees above some others. Verily, your God is swift in retribution; yet He is undoubtedly Most Forgiving, Most Merciful.

Chapter 7
The Zeniths 

7.1	Alif - Laam - Meem - Saad(352)
7.2	This is a Book revealed to you to warn thereby, and as a contemplation to the believers; so, let there not be any impediment in your breast on account of it.
7.3	Follow that which is revealed to you from your God, and do not follow any guide other than He; very little do you reflect.(353)
7.4	And how many a township, have We destroyed! Our punishment came to them at night or during the day while in sleep.
7.5	When Our punishment came to them, they but said, "We indeed were a people transgressing."
7.6	Then We will undoubtedly question the people to whom were sent; and indeed, the messengers will be asked.(354)
7.7	Then surely We will make them know; verily, We were not absent. 
7.8	That Day the weighing is real - the victorious are those whose weight scaled greater. 
7.9	And those whose weighing is low, they brought loss upon themselves for having differed from Our Signs.
7.10	And surely We established your life on the earth wherein We gave you the luxuries, but you show very little gratitude.
7.11	And undoubtedly We created you, and We perfected you. Then We said to the dwellers of the skies: bow to Adam. All obeyed, save Iblis - he was not of the obedient.(355)
7.12	Said, "What prevented you from obeying when I commanded you?" Said he, "I am superior to him - You created me from fire, and You created him from clay."(356)
7.13	Said, "Get ye down from this! It is not for you to wax proud here, and so, go away; verily, you are of the despised."(357)
7.14	Said, "Give me respite until the day they are raised up."(358)
7.15	Said, "Sure, you are of those given respite."(359)
7.16	Said, "Because You left me astray, I will certainly sit in wait for them on Thy straight path."(360)
7.17	"Then I will keep coming from before and from behind them, and from their right and their left; You shall not see most of them grateful."(361)
7.18	Said, "Get out of here despised and banished; I will surely fill hell with those who among them follow you - and with all of you."	
7.19	"O Adam, you with your companion taste the fruits of the garden; but never lay your hands on the timber - you will both become of the transgressors."(362)
7.20	Then, Shaitan defiled them both so that their hidden evil possessed them. And he said, "Your God has forbidden the timber for you lest you will become angels; or lest you will become eternal."
7.21	And he swore to them and said, "Lo! I only wish good to you!"
7.22     	Thus he beguiled them and led them downward; and, when they savoured that which they were forbidden, their wickedness became plain; they tried to conceal their sins with their heavenly attire - at this, their God said to them, "Did I not forbid you from the timber and tell you: Lo, Shaitan is your obvious enemy?"(363)
7.23	They said, "Our God, we have wronged ourselves - if You do not forgive us by Your Mercy, we will surely be the losers."
7.24	Said: Get ye down - each of you will be a test unto others; have your sojourn in pleasantness on the earth.(364)
7.25	He said, "You will abide therein and die therein, and you will be raised forth from there."
7.26	O descendants of Adam, "We have certainly given you clothing as a protection and as an adornment; but the attire of piety is the best; and, it is of the Signs of Allah - so be well-informed."
7.27    	O the descendants of Adam, let not Shaitan put you to test as he did to both your parents - he made them lose their attire and dignity, earn their shame, and pushed them out of Paradise. Undoubtedly, he sees you; he and his companions - hiding from your sight! Yes, We have made Shaitans, friends of the disbelievers.
7.28	When they do something wrong they say, "We found our forefathers upon this; and, Allah has ordained this upon us." Say, "Allah will certainly not command indecency - do you say  about Allah that which you know not?" 
7.29	Say, "My God has enjoined justice; in all your deeds set your hearts upright and call on Him sincerely - as He commenced you, so you shall return." 
7.30	A party He guided, and a party cast to doom - for surely they have taken Shaitan as their ally instead of Allah, and deem them, guided. 
7.31	O, the descendants of Adam, make beauteous your time and places with devotion, and in His Remembrance; eat and drink, and be not excessive; surely, He loves not the prodigal.
7.32	Say, "Who forbade the good and the pure needs that Allah has brought forth for His servants?" Say: "They are in this world only for the believers, and it belongs unto them until the Last Day." Thus do We explain Our Signs to those who understand.
7.33	Say, "All that my God has forbidden are - open and secret evils in your hearts; your excesses; causing unjust troubles; setting up partners to Allah without proof, and saying things on Allah of which you do not know."
7.34	Each one has an appointed time, and when the Hour reaches them, not a moment gets postponed nor advanced.(365)
7.35	O, the descendants of Adam, "Whoever repents and reforms fearing their God, when the messengers come to you from among you and explain My Signs to you - they shall neither fear nor grieve."
7.36	But whoever denies Our Signs and becomes arrogant, they are the inhabitants of hell - and they will abide therein.
7.37	Who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against Allah and disputes His Signs? Then to them will reach their portion prescribed until Our messengers come to them and capture their souls, they say, "Where are those who you called besides Allah?" And they would say, "They have vanished away from us", and thus will they stand witness against themselves - 'truly, they were disbelievers'.
7.38	He will say: "Enter ye the fire with those who entered before ye from among the jinn and the men." As each enters the hell they would curse their people, and when they have all reached the hell, those who entered last would say about the first, 'my God, it is those who misled us; so, give them twice the punishment of fire.' He would say, "To each is twice the portion - but you will not know."(366)
7.39 	And the first will say to the last, "You were no whit better than us; so, you too taste the punishment for what you have earned." 
7.40    	Surely to those who deny Our Signs and scorn them, for them the gates of heaven will not open; and, they will not enter paradise until the camel goes through the needle's eye. Thus do We reward the guilty.
7.41	For them in the hell are carpets, and above them are the sheets of fire, and thus do We requite the wrongdoers.
7.42	But whoever believes and does good - We will not force anyone beyond his means, and they will be in the bounteous grace of their God wherein they abide.
7.43	And We will remove the animosities from their hearts, rivers flow beneath them, and they will say: to Allah belongs all glory for having guided us to this; had not Allah guided us, we would have never been guided. Indeed, our Messengers from God brought the Truth." They will be said: "You have been made to inherit this paradise for what you did."
7.44	The inhabitants of heaven will call out to the inmates of hell and say: "Truly and surely we have received what our God had promised us; have you received truly what your God has promised you?" They will say: Yes. At that, a revealer would intervene and say: May the curse of Allah be upon the evil ones.
7.45	They debarred the path of Allah and desired crookedness in it, and they disbelieved in the hereafter.
7.46	And between them will be a veil, and on its zenith will be many people who recognise each one by their signs, and they will call out to the heaven-bound: "Peace be upon you." They have yet not entered heaven, but they are eager to.
7.47	And when their eyes are made to turn towards the hell-bound, they will say: "O our God, make us not in company with the sinners."
7.48	And those who are the foremost will call to some people - knowing by their signs and say, "Lo, all that you had amassed, and that which were your pride has not availed you aught."
7.49	"Are these the people concerning whom you swore and said, "Allah will not bestow His grace upon these?" And they would say, "Enter ye the heaven! Fear not ye, nor will ye grieve."
7.50	Say the inmates of hell, calling out to the inhabitants of heaven, "Give us a little of the water, or of the food that Allah has given you." But they will say, "Allah has indeed forbidden both these upon the deniers."
7.51	They had taken their lives for freak and fun, and the worldly life had deluded them; therefore, We forget them due to their rejection of Our Signs and ignoring this day of meeting with Us. 
7.52    	Surely We gave them the Book. We have revealed it with insight - guidance and grace for those who believe.(367)
7.53	Do they wait but for the end of it? On the final day, those who were forgetful thereof, will say: The Messengers of our God indeed brought the truth; is there anyone who would intercede for us? If so let them negotiate for us, or could we be sent back? Then we will do something other than what we used to do - verily they have lost themselves, and all that they forged will disappear from them.
7.54	Verily, your God Allah created the skies and the earth in six periods, and upon them He placed His authority; He covers the day with the night, and the night fast follows the day; and made the sun, the moon and the stars to obey His authority; does not the creation and the kingdom belong to Him? Blessed be Allah, the God of the worlds!
7.55	Submit to your God with humility and soulfulness; He indeed loves not transgressors.
7.56	And cause no mischief on the earth after reform, and submit only to Him with fear and fervour; assuredly, the blessing of Allah is nigh to those who do good. 
7.57	And it is He who sends breeze as glad tiding before His Mercy; when it bears the dense clouds We move them towards the dead land and bring down the rain from it, and from there We bring forth all kinds of fruits - likewise We will raise the dead. May you receive sense.
7.58	A lively land brings forth the produce by the command of its God, but the spoilt land produces meanest ones; thus, do We explain the Signs for those who show thanks.
7.59	Indeed, We sent Nuh to his people. He said, "O my people, surrender to Allah, for there is no God but He; and, I am afraid that upon you, indeed, is a mighty day of torment in the offing."
7.60    	The chieftains among his people said, "Ah, we see you in manifest error."
7.61	He said, "My people, I have no miss with me. I am but a Messenger from the God of the worlds."
7.62	"I only give you the Message of my God and admonish - and I know from Allah that you know not."
7.63    	"Is it amazing to you that through a man from among you reaches an admonition from your God, that you get the warning, that you might guard and that you may receive His Mercy?"
7.64	Yet, they said, 'he is a liar.' So, We saved him and those who were with him in the ship, and We drowned those who denied Our Signs. Verily, they were people blind.
7.65	And to the people of Aad, their brethren Hud, "O my people, surrender only to Allah; there is no God to you other than Him; will you then not fear?"
7.66	The denying leaders in his community said, "Lo! We see you in foolishness; and lo! We do deem you liars."
7.67	He said, "My people, I have no foolishness in me, but I am a Messenger from the God of the worlds-
7.68	"I only deliver the message of God; and I am to you a true admonisher;
7.69	"Is it amazing to you that through a man from among you reaches warning to you from your God? He made you inheritors on the land after the people of Nuh, and increased your providence - so, remember all Allah's grace upon you; you will be successful."
7.70	They said, "Have you come here to say that we should surrender only to Allah, leaving the deities our forefathers worshipped? If you are truthful, bring to us that which you admonish."
7.71	He said, "Lo! God's anger and torment have come upon you; and, when Allah has not sent down a sign - do you argue with me concerning the names you and your forefathers have fancied? So expect! Surely I am expecting too, with you."
7.72	So We saved him and those who were with him by Our Grace, and We cut the root of those who belied Our Signs and remained disbelievers.
7.73    	And to Samud, their brethren Salih: He said, "O my people, surrender to Allah; none but He is your Protector. And, from your God has come unto you a clear Sign; this camel has come from Allah as a clear Sign - henceforth allow it to graze on Allah's land, and intend not any harm to it, lest there seizes you a painful torment."
7.74	And remember: After the people of Aad, He made you the following generations and gave you sustenance; and you build mansions, carve out the mountains and construct houses on its plains; so, remember Allah's grace - wander not spoilt, on the earth creating mischief."
7.75	The proud leaders of his community said to those believers who were considered weak, "Do you know clearly, that Salih is a messenger sent by his God?" They said, "Certainly we believe in the message sent through him."
7.76	The proud said, "Verily we deny that which you believe."
7.77	Then they hamstrung the she-camel and infringed the order of God. And they said, "O Salih if you are of the messengers bring us that which you warn."
7.78	So the earthquake seized them and they were prone-dead in their own houses.
7.79	Then he had kept away from them, and he said, "O my people, indeed I delivered you the message of my God and admonished, but you loved not the admonishers."
7.80	And Lut - he said to his people, "Did you opt for an evil deed that none in the world before you ever dared?"
7.81	Assuredly, you lust men over women; nay, you are a people, passing over.
7.82	All that the people of his community said nought but this: Surely, these people are very pure; so send them out of your city.
7.83	So we delivered him and his family, barring his wife; she was of those who stayed behind.
7.84	And We rained rain upon them. Behold, the evil end of the guilty.
7.85	And to Madyan, their brethren Shuaib: He said, "O my people, surrender to Allah; there is no God but He. Verily, a clear Sign from your God has come to you; weigh your measures in full and appropriately, and do not reduce a thing that is due to the people; and, cause no mischief in the land after reformation - this is good for you if you are believers."
7.86	"And do not prevent the believers by threatening, sitting in every way and deviating them from the path of Allah. And remember you were very small in numbers, and He made you a large populace; and behold, the end of the mischief-makers."
7.87	"And a party of you believe in what is sent with me, and another party do not believe in it; observe patience until Allah decides amongst us - He is the best of judges."
7.88	The arrogant leaders of his community said, "O Shuaib, we will certainly drive you and those who believed with you away from our nation; or you should return to our way." He said, "Should we, even if we hate it?"
7.89	"And if we return to your way after Allah has rescued us from it, it is indeed that we have forged a lie against Allah; unless our God, Allah wills, we will never return to it - our God encompasses everything by Wisdom, and we trust in Allah - Our God! Decide between us, and between our people in Truth, and You are the best of the Deciders."
7.90	And the leaders of his community, who were disbelievers, said: "If you follow Shuaib, surely you will be a loser."
7.91	So the earthquake struck them, and in the morning found them lying dead in their houses.
7.92    	Those who denied Shuaib became as though they had never existed - and those who belied Shuaib became losers.
7.93	So he kept away from them and said, "O my people! Certainly, I delivered to you the message and glad tidings of my God; so, how can I sorrow for a people who reject?"
7.94	We have not left the people of any town whereto We have sent our prophets, without seizing them with poverty and diseases so that they shall bow and surrender.
7.95	Then We delivered them from their agonising deprivation to a good life, and when they were flourishing in it they said, "Such change of fortunes did happen to our forefathers before." So we seized them unawares.
7.96	If the people of those towns had believed and feared, We would have opened up Our graciousness from the skies and the earth; but, they slandered, and so We seized them for what they used to do.
7.97	Do the people of the town are fearless of Our torment - that it will not reach them while they are asleep in the night?
7.98	Or do the people of the town are fearless of Our torment - that it will not reach them while they were playful during the day?
7.99	Have they become fearless of Allah's design? None will be daring of Allah's designing except those who were losers.
7.100	Is it not clear to them that after the predecessors that We will punish them too who have succeeded them for their transgression? We have put a seal on their hearts, and so they will not heed.
7.101	We relate to you the histories of these towns; verily, their messengers brought them clear Proofs, but because of their denial before they are not to believe - thus does Allah puts the seal upon the hearts of the disbelievers.(368)
7.102	And We did not see commitment in most of them - but We did see most of them, sinners.(369)
7.103	After them, We sent Musa with Our Signs to Firaun and his chieftains - then, they rejected them, and behold! How was the end of the corrupters!
7.104	And Musa said, "O Firaun, verily, I am a messenger from the God of all the worlds."
7.105	It is upon me that I say not except the Truth about Allah; surely, from your God, I have brought clear Signs - so, send with me the people of Israel."
7.106	He said, "If you have brought the Signs, bring us if you are truthful."
7.107	Then he cast his staff; and behold! It became a big snake.
7.108	And he drew forth his hand, lo! It was white for the beholders.
7.109	Said the chieftains of the people of Firaun, "Certainly he is crafty in magic."
7.110	"He plans to expel you away from your land; so what do you counsel?"
7.111	They said, "Give him and his brother a lease of time and send into all cities the summoners.
7.112	"They will bring you, expert magicians."
7.113	So the magicians came to Firaun; they said: Will we be surely granted reward if we are victors?
7.114	He said, "Yes. And indeed you will be privileged to be close."
7.115	They said, "O Musa! Cast you, or us?"
7.116	Said he, "Cast you!" And when they cast they bewitched the eyes of the people, creating fearsome illusions of the most terrible sorts.
7.117	And We said to Musa, "Cast your staff!" When he threw, it swallowed up their lying show.
7.118	Thus the truth was established, and all their evil was made vain.
7.119	Then there was their defeat and disgrace.
7.120	And the magicians bowing in abject surrender -
7.121	They said, "We certainly believed in the God of all the worlds.
7.122	"And He is the God of Musa and Harun."
7.123	Firaun said, "Have you put trust in him before I gave you leave? Surely, this is a plot you hatched in the city with Musa to drive out its people - you will soon know."
7.124	He said, "Surely I shall have your hands and legs cut off upon alternate sides, and crucify you every one."
7.125	They said, "We indeed return only to Our God."
7.126	They said, "You take vengeance on us because we believed in the Signs that came to us from our God," and said, "O our God, vouchsafe unto us steadfastness, and receive us as those who were at peace with you."
7.127	Then the leaders of the people of Firaun said, "Will you leave Musa and his people who have caused disorder in the land, and that they would ignore you and your deities?" He said, "We will kill their men and leave their women alive; we are in power over them."
7.128	Musa said to his people, "Seek help from Allah, and be patient; surely, the earth belongs to Allah - and inherits it to whom He will of His slaves; and lo, the final victory is for those who guard."
7.129	They said, "We suffered before you came, and after too." He said, "It is that your God shall destroy your enemies, and will make you succeeders on the earth - He is ever watchful over what you do."   
7.130    And, certainly We punished the people of Firaun with famine and with the shortage of its produce - perchance they heed.
7.131	Whenever a good omen comes upon them, they said, 'it is due for us'; but, when evil befalls them they say, 'it is the spell cast upon us by the Musa and his people'. And know well, all their evils have come only from Allah; yet, most of them know not.
7.132	And they said, "We are not to believe you however much you bring your magic to enchant us." 
7.133	So We sent upon them downpour, locusts, lice, frogs and blood as Our Signs, but they were arrogant and wicked people.
7.134	Whenever harm comes upon them, they said to Musa, 'seek from your God for us as per His promise to you; if you relieve us from this harm, surely we will believe you; and, certainly, we will send the people of Israel with you'.
7.135	And when We removed their harm for a period which they were to reach, lo! they broke their word. 
7.136	So We took vengeance on them by drowning them into the sea for they continued to be heedless and denied Our Signs.(370)
7.137	And We made the people of Israel who were considered the weakest, as the lords of the lands of the east and the west. And upon them, We blessed Our bounties; thus, your God's promise descended upon them in full, for their patience and steadfastness; and, We razed to the ground all that Firaun and his people had invented and contrived.
7.138	And when We made the people of Israel cross the sea, they came upon a people, idol-worshipping. They said, "O Musa, make for us also a deity similar to the deities they have." He said, "Surely you are a people without sense."
7.139	"Certainly the life they have taken to is bound to perish; and everything they do is vanity."
7.140	He said, "Will I search for you, a God that is other than Allah? And He has raised you above all the people of the world."
7.141	And remember: "We saved you from the people of Firaun; they put you to severe persecution; they killed your menfolks and let live your womenfolks, and for you in this, from your God, was a great test."
7.142	And We promised Musa thirty nights; then We completed it with ten more - thus your God's Hour completed as forty nights. Musa said to his brother Harun, "Be my representative to my community, correcting them; and follow not the way of the corruptor."
7.143	And when Musa came at the appointed Hour, his God spoke to him; then he said, "O my God, I must see You; show You to me." He said, "You can never see Me; behold this mountain! If it remains in its place, then you can see Me; and, when his God sent upon it His Power, it became dust. Musa fainted, and when he came around, he said, "You are most Pure; I seek forgiveness of You; I am of those who believed, firsthand."
7.144	He said, "O Musa, I have chosen you from mankind by My message and by that which I have spoken to you - so hold fast to what I have bestowed you with, and be among those who are grateful."
7.145	And We inscribed upon tablets, every verse of honour and clear signs of each of them and said, "Hold fast to it, and say to your people to follow which are clear Signs unto them. Soon, I will show you the abode of the wicked."   
7.146    I will turn away those who are wrongfully arrogant on the earth, from every Sign of Me; then, even when they behold all the Signs, they shall not believe them - when they perceive the straight path they shall not regard it as their way, but when they look at  an evil path they will exercise it as their way. That is because they belied Our Signs and slighted them.
7.147	Whoever belies Our Signs and their meeting of the hereafter - all their deeds are null; will they gain anything other than that for what they worked?
7.148	Then the people of Musa made for themselves, of their ornaments, an idol of a calf, having a lowing sound. Beheld them not that it will certainly not speak to them, nor will it guide them even? But they took it, and have wronged themselves.
7.149	And, when they repented their wrong-doing and knew that they had fallen off course, they said, "If Our God does not forgive us and show His Mercy upon us, surely we will be losers."
7.150    When Musa returned to his people with anger and anguish, said, "What you did in my absence was very sorrowful; do you hasten your God's command?" Then casting the tablets seized his brother's head and pulled him toward him; he said, "O my mother's son, these people did weaken me and nearly killed me; so do not make the enemies gloat over me, and join me not with the wrong-doers." 
7.151	He said, "O my God, forgive me and my brother, and cause us to enter your grace; for, You are the Most Merciful of the merciful." 
7.152	Surely the wrath of their God and disgrace for them in this world will soon grab them for having taken to the calf; such is the reward for those who forge lies.
7.153 	But those wrong-doers - if they repent and amend, and become believers, surely, your God after that Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
7.154	When the anger faded out of Musa, he took back the tablets. In them were the guidance and the grace for those who fear God.
7.155	And Musa selected seventy men from his people to meet Us on the prescribed Hour; and, when an earthquake seized them, he said, "O my God, had You willed, You could have destroyed them and me long before. Do You destroy us all for what the ignorant among us did? That is, but Your test; with this You leave astray whom You will, and guide whom You will. You are our Protector; so forgive us, and bestow Mercy on us. You are the best of the forgivers."
7.156	"Bestow upon us favours both in this world and in the hereafter! Surely, we look up to You alone." He said, "I will seize with My punishment whom I will, but My grace surrounds everything; yet, I will bestow it upon those who fear Me, who purify themselves and who believe in Our Signs."
7.157	Those who follow the Enlightened, the Prophet-Messenger of Us, will find description of him in their Taurat and Injeel: he will enjoin upon them all good-deeds and forbid them from evil works, and he will make lawful for them all pure things, and prevent them the evil ones. And he will lessen their heaviest burdens and remove their slavishness; so, whoever believes in him, and dignifies him, and helps him, and follows the enlightenment bestowed with him will alone be the victors.(371)
7.158	Say, "O humankind, verily, I am the messenger to you all from Allah, and unto Him is the kingdom of the skies and the earth, and there is no God but He. He brings forth life and causes death - and therefore believe in Allah and His Enlightened Prophet-Messenger; and, he too believes in Allah and His Signs. So, believe in Him alone that you may receive guidance."
7.159	And among the people of Musa are those who are Just and guided by the truth.
7.160	And We divided them into twelve sections, and when they asked Musa for water, We inspired Musa to strike the rock with his staff; from it sprang forth twelve fountainheads, and each section knew their water source. And We made the clouds to cover over them, and We sent down upon them "Mannu Salva" and said to them, "Eat of the good things We have bestowed upon you." They have not wronged Us at all, but they wronged themselves.
7.161	When it is said to them, "Dwell in this city and live pleasantly with its abundance everywhere - and enter the city with submission, saying, 'Forgive our sins,' and We shall forgive your sins; and, We will further Our Blessings to the good-doers" -
7.162	The wrong-doers among them changed the 'word' for a wrong meaning, and for the evil of which We sent down on them the punishment from the sky.
7.163	And ask them of the people by the seashore - they were transgressing on Saturdays, for only on such Saturdays the fishes came in abundance but not on days other than Saturdays; thus, did We put them to test due to their sins.
7.164	A party of them said, "Why do you advise a people whom Allah had decided either to destroy or to punish with severe punishment." They said, "So that they may be relieved of their responsibility, or that they may fear God."
7.165	 So when they forgot that whereof they were reminded; We saved those who forbade wrong, and punished the wrong-doers with evil torment for their continued transgression.
7.166	When they transgressed their limits, We said to them, "Be ye apes, despised!"
7.167	And remember when your God said, "We will surely appoint over them the most wicked to deal with them heinously until the world ends." Surely your God is swift in retribution; and, assuredly He is Oft-Forgiving, Most-Merciful.
7.168	And We divided them into multiple sections - therein are the good, and therein other than that; and, We tested them with the good and the evil haply they shall return.
7.169	Then a people succeeded them and claimed ownership for the Scripture; they fell for the worldly pleasures and say, "We will be forgiven;" and, they will grab even lower things if they come upon. Are they not under the covenant by the Book that they are not to say besides the truth concerning Allah? And they have seen all therein. The life to come is ever grand for those who fear. Do you not then reflect?
7.170	And as for those who hold fast to the Book and stand steadfast by it, We will not allow the reward of the good-doers to go in waste.
7.171	And We raised the mountain above them like a covering; but, when they feared its falling over them, "Hold fast to what We have revealed to you and be mindful of it - that you will guard."(372)
7.172	And remind them when your God brought forth from Adam's generation from their backs made them a testimony unto themselves and said, "Am I not your God?" They said, "True, We bear witness!" lest you should say on the Last Day, 'lo! we were ignorant of this.'(373)
7.173 	Or lest should you say, 'it is our fathers who ascribed partners to Allah! but we are their descendants - will You destroy us for what those deniers did?'
7.174	We thus reveal that they may return.
7.175	And recite to them the history of a man; We had revealed Our Signs - yet he turned away from them; then, shaitan followed him, and thus he was among those who went astray.
7.176	And had We willed We would have raised him up with Our Signs, but he glued to the worldly life with lust; his similitude is that of a dog; it drops its tongue out if you leave it alone; and, lets its tongue out if you chase it away - such is the parable of those who belie Our Signs; thus recite to them their histories perchance they might take thought.
7.177	The worst is the example of those who belied Our Signs; they had wronged themselves.
7.178   To whoever Allah gave guidance is the guided one, and whoever He had left astray, are the total losers.
7.179	And surely, We have destined most among the jinn and the humankind for hell - they have hearts wherewith they heed not; they have eyes wherewith they see not; they have ears wherewith they hear not. They are akin to cattle - no, worse than them; these are they who slighted.(374)
7.180	And Allah's are the most beautiful Names; call Him by them; and, leave those who blaspheme His Names - they will be rewarded for what they do.
7.181	And there are a people of whom We had created; they show the True Path, even as they live honestly by it.
7.182	And as to those who belie Our Signs, We will seize them steadily without that they would ever know.
7.183	And I respite them - lo! My scheme is strong.
7.184	Do they not reflect? Their companion is not mad - he is nought but a plain warner.
7.185	Or, have they not reflected the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and that which Allah had created? And that their Hour might have drawn nigh? So, apart from this which other 'hadiths' - the recitation do they believe?
7.186	Whomsoever Allah has left astray; there is none to guide him; He lets them to their straying, bewildered.
7.187	They say to you, "When is the Hour, the appointed Time?" Say: "Its wisdom is only with God; none but He shall reveal its occurrence; it will happen as the greatest events in the heavens and earth; and, it will come to you of a sudden." They ask you concerning it, thinking that you know it well - surely, the knowledge of it is with Allah; but, most people know not.
7.188	Say, "Unless Allah so Wishes, I cannot either do good or cause harm to me; and, I would have earned much good, had I known the hidden wisdom. And no evil would have touched me; I am, but a bringer of glad tiding and a warner, to those who believe."
7.189   He created you all from the Same Soul, and from it He created its companion for solace - when one seeks the comfort of another, it began to bear the burden; and, when the stress became unbearable, they both turned to Allah, their God, and said, "If you deliver us good by Your Mercy, we will be grateful."(375)
7.190	But when He delivered them, they ascribed partners unto Him in respect of that which He had given them; Exalted is Allah, High above all that they associate.
7.191	Do they associate those who created naught - and while they are created ones?
7.192	And they are powerless to help them, and they are helpless themselves.
7.193	Even if you call them to the straight path they will not follow you; it is all the same for you whether you call them or keep silent.
7.194	Surely like you; slaves are they whom you call upon besides Allah; so, call upon them if you are truthful - let them answer you.
7.195	What, have legs to walk with, or they have hands to hold with, or they have eyes to see with, or do they have ears to hear with? Say, "Plot against me calling upon all the deities that you associate, and give me no respite."
7.196	Verily, my saviour is Allah; He sent down the Book; He befriends the righteous.
7.197	Those whom you call besides Him are helpless to you and helpless to themselves.
7.198	And if you call them to the straight path they will not heed; and, it will seem as though they see you, but they see you not.
7.199	But, keep to forgiveness - bid right, and ignore the ignorant.
7.200	And if shaitan stirs up corruption in your mind, seek protection from Allah. Verily He is Hearer, Knower.
7.201	When Shaitan incites the minds of those who fear God, yes, they are aware and they awaken.
7.202	But their brethren will only lead them to error - they will not slacken a bit.
7.203 	And if you do not bring them a Sign, they would say, "Why have you not brought this Sign?" Say, "All I follow is what is clarified to me by my God - and this, for the believers, is Insight, Guidance and Grace from your God."
7.204   And when you hear the Quran, listen to it intently, and calm down - you may receive Mercy.
7.205	And keep constancy in remembering your God in the morning and evening with humility and fear; and, be not of those who are forgetful.
7.206	Those who are constant in remembering God, indeed, do not show pride nor will they not be humble; but, they praise His Purity, and surrender to His warning. 


Chapter 8
The spoils of just war
The Windfalls 

8.1	They ask you concerning the spoils of just war. Say, "The windfalls belong to Allah and His messenger; so, fear Allah - and conduct in just manner, and if you are believers obey Allah and His messenger.
8.2	The believers are they, whose hearts will tremble in fear at the mention of Allah; if they are reminded of His Signs, their faith will increase; and, they will put their trust in their God.
8.3	They will be steadfast in Allah's remembrance, and give of what We have provided them.
8.4	Such are truly the believers; for them is a higher grade, forgiveness and beautiful sustenance with their God.
8.5	As a party of the believers who were hateful when your God sent you forth from your house in truth-
8.6	Though they are well informed, they argue with you concerning the truth- as if they are being dragged toward death while they see;
8.7	And remember when Allah said, "Of the two parties, one is surely for you." You wished for when you were weak - Allah, by His Will, wishes to establish the Truth and root out the falsehood.
8.8	Even as the unjust hate, He eliminates the falsehood and establishes the Truth.
8.9	When you turned to your God for refuge, He said to you, "Certainly I will help you with a thousand angel-warriors following you."
8.10	And Allah so made that your hearts attain peace and as a good word, and that there is no help from other than Allah. Surely Allah is Exalted, Wise.
8.11	To settle your hearts at peace, He allowed naps upon you; and, He sent down rain upon you from the sky: to purify you, and to cleanse your minds from the evils of shaitan, and to strengthen your hearts and to make your feet firm.
8.12	Your God inspired the angels, "Verily I am with you; so strengthen those who believe; I will cast terror in the hearts of those who disbelieve, and you shall smite at their necks and cut off their fingers."(376)
8.13	This is because they did injustice to Allah and His messenger; whoever does injustice to Allah and His messenger, surely Allah is severe in punishing.(377)
8.14	"So taste this! And that the punishment of fire is for the disbelievers."(378)
8.15	O believers, if you see the rejecters as a force, do not turn your backs to them.
8.16	On that day, if anyone turned their backs except to strike them back or to join with their force behind them, surely, Allah's wrath is upon him - his abode is hell; an evil abode it is!
8.17	You did not strike at the enemies; Allah did strike at them- and when you threw, you did not throw it; Allah did throw. And He did so, to test the believers beautifully; verily, Allah is Hearing, Knowing.
8.18	And that Allah shall surely disgrace the plots of the disbelievers;-
8.19	If you have been looking up for victory, surely that victory has come; henceforth, if you stayed away, it would be good for you; but if you return, We shall return too, and however high your forces may be, it shall avail you nought. And Allah is with those who believe. 
8.20	O believers, obey Allah and His messenger; do not ignore him while you hear.
8.21	And become not as those who say, "We hear," while they do not.
8.22    	Surely in the sight of Allah the worst creatures are they who are deaf and dumb and do not understand. 
8.23	And had Allah seen some goodness in them, He would have made them hear; even if He had made them hear, they would have turned away, ignoring.
8.24	O believers, if Allah and His messenger address you with a goodly greeting, answer their call; know that Allah rules between a man and his heart, and unto Him shall ye be gathered.
8.25	And fear the retribution, and know that it does not seize particularly those among you who transgress. And Allah is severe in punishing.(379)
8.26	And call to mind(380) when He took you into His refuge and strengthened you with His help when you were a small and oppressed population, and feared the people would snatch you away; and, He gave you honourable sustenance -  perhaps you will give thanks.
8.27	O believers, betray not Allah and the messenger, nor knowingly betray your trusts.
8.28	And know that your wealth and your children are a trial and that Allah, with Him, is the Grand Reward.
8.29	O believers, if you fear Allah, He would provide you with distinction and acquit you of all your evils and will forgive you; and, Allah is Bountiful, Abounding.
8.30	And when the disbelievers counselled to imprison you, or to kill you, or to drive you out. They devised, and Allah designed too - and, Allah is the best of the Devisers.
8.31	And when Our Signs are recited to them, they say, 'we had heard; if we wish, we would narrate the like of it - it is but the stories of the ancients.'
8.32	And when they said, "O Allah if this is the truth from You - then, rain down upon us stones from the sky or send upon us unbearable suffering."
8.33	But Allah will not punish them while you are with them, and not will Allah punish them while they seek forgiveness.
8.34	But why should Allah not punish them? They trespass and bar in their 'righteous houses', while they are not its custodians; but for the righteous shall be its guardians, yet most of them understand not.(381)
8.35	And their prayers in the home are but whistling and hand-clapping. "So, taste the torment for what you used to reject."
8.36	Undoubtedly, the disbelievers spend their wealth to disrupt from the path of Allah - they will keep doing so until grief strikes them for good, then they will be overcome; and, the disbelievers will be gathered together in Hell. 
8.37	That Allah should separate the good and the evil ones - pile up all the wicked one upon another, and cast them all into Hell; these are the losers.
8.38	Say to the disbelievers, "If they keep away from now, their deeds thus far will be forgiven; but if they return, the examples of the ancients have already gone.
8.39	And wage a just war against them until the corruption ends, and the life is pure only for Allah - but if they cease, surely Allah Sees what they do.
8.40	And if they turn away, then unquestionably, Allah is your Protector - He is the best Protector and the best Helper.
8.41	And from your windfalls a fifth is for Allah and His messenger;- and, for their dear ones, for the orphans, for the needy, and for those who are on the righteous path. If you have believed, and in the Guidance, We sent down upon Our servant on the day when the two forces met - then, Allah has power over all things.
8.42    	When you were on the one side of the valley, and them on the far end; and, the affluent behind you - though there was a rendezvous between you and them, definitely you would have differed. But, Allah does what he concludes, that whoever perished were destroyed for reasons, and that whoever had escaped, were allowed so for a reason. Verily, Allah is the Hearing, the Knowing.
8.43	When Allah showed them to you as weak; and, had He shown them to you stronger, you would have indulged in differences, losing heart - but, Allah saved. Surely, He knows what is in the breasts. 
8.44	And when you both met, He showed them to you as small while He showed you to them as low - He did so to complete that which He had predestined; and, unto Allah is the return of all affairs.
8.45	O believers, if you are to face a population, stand firm - remember Allah more; you will be the victors.
8.46	And, obey Allah and His messenger - engage not in disputes lest you will become cowards and grow weak; and, observe patience - verily Allah is with those who are patient.
8.47	And be not as those who set forth from their houses offensively, and to be seen of men, debarring the people from the path of Allah; and, Allah surrounds all they do.
8.48	And when shaitan made fair-seeming to them their deeds and said, "Today there is no one of mankind who can conquer you, for I am truly your protector." Then when the two forces met, he stepped back, turning away, said, "Indeed I am quit of you; I see what you cannot see; surely I fear Allah, and Allah is severe in punishing."(382)
8.49	The hypocrites and in whose hearts was the disease said, "their faith has deluded them." But whoever puts trust in Allah - surely, Allah is Mighty, Wise.
8.50	And when you see the angels capturing the souls of the disbelievers, will smite their faces and their backs and say, "Taste the burning of the melting fire."-
8.51	That, for what your hands have forwarded, and for that God is never unjust unto His servants.
8.52	Like the state of people of Firaun and those before them; they rejected the Signs of Allah; so, Allah seized them for their sins. Verily, Allah is Powerful, Severe in Punishing.
8.53	For Allah does not change His bestow favoured upon a people unless they change what is in their hearts - surely Allah is the Hearing, the Knowing.
8.54	Like the state of people of Firaun and those before them; they rejected the Signs of God; so, We destroyed them for their sins - and We drowned the people of Firaun, and all were unjust.
8.55	Surely the wretched creatures in Allah's sight are the rejecters - they will not believe.
8.56	With whoever of them you enter into a pact - their custom is to dishonour it; they fear not;- 
8.57	So, when you seize a chance over them, deal with them with such stringency that their ranks in rear, retreat in fear - haply they might mend.
8.58	And if you fear dishonesty from any party, then throw back to them equally; surely Allah loves not the dishonest. 
8.59	And let not the rejecters think they had outstripped; lo, they can never escape.
8.60	And stay in high gear to the extent possible of your forces, and the steeds of war to run-down the enemy of Allah and your enemy, and the enemies besides - you know them not! Allah knows them. And whatever you spend in the path of Allah, will be returned to you in full, and you will not be wronged.
8.61	And if they lean to peace, then you too toward it, and put your trust in Allah; surely He is the Hearing, the Knowing.
8.62	But if they intend to deceive you - then sufficient is Allah for you; it is He who strengthened you with His help and with the believers.
8.63    	And He created affinity amongst them, and even if you spend all on the earth you could not have united their hearts, but Allah made the bond. Indeed, He is Mighty, Wise. 
8.64	O Prophet, sufficient is Allah for you and for those of the believers who follow you. 
8.65	O Prophet, instil ardour in the believers for a just war - if there are twenty patient ones among you, they will overwhelm two hundred; and, if there are a hundred among you, they will surpass a thousand unbelievers, for they are a people with no intelligence. 
8.66	Knowing your weakness, Allah has now made it lighter for you - therefore, if there be of you a steadfast hundred, they will overcome two hundred; and, if there be of you a thousand, they will subdue by Allah's permission two thousand - and, Allah is with those who are patient. 
8.67	It is not for a prophet to seize anyone for a crime without establishing the truth in the land; you desire the worldly pleasures, but Allah wishes you the good for the future - and Allah is the Mighty, Wise. 
8.68	Had it not been pre-written with Allah a severe punishment would have come upon you for what you took away.
8.69	So, put to good use of the windfalls of just war lawfully and in truth, and fear Allah; surely, Allah is Most-Forgiving, Most-Merciful.
8.70	O Prophet, say to those who are under your custody, "If Allah sees any good in you, He would provide you with much better provision than what has been taken away from you, and He will forgive you - and, Allah is Most Forgiving, Most Merciful."
8.71	But if they try to deceive you - before they tried to deceive even Allah; so, He gave you power over them, and Allah is the Knowing, Wise.
8.72	Surely, those who as believers took to exile and struggled in the path of Allah with their possession and their selves - and, those who gave such of them refuge and aid, they are companions one of another. And you bear no responsibility for the ones who have believed but emigrated not until they emigrated. But if they seek your help in the straight path, it is your duty to help them - and, it shall not be against the people with whom you have a treaty. And Allah is the Seer of all you do.
8.73	And the disbelievers are allies of one another; and if you are not like this,- there will be tumult and oppression in the land, and great mischief. 
8.74    	And those who believed and emigrated and strove steadfast in the path of Allah, and those who give them refuge and aid - such are the believers, indeed. For them is forgiveness and noble provision.
8.75	And then, those who believed, and emigrated, and strove in the just war with you, they too are of you; and by Allah's decree, they are your lawful kindred; one being dear to another. Allah is undoubtedly aware of all things.


Chapter 9
Repentance

9.1	Allah and His messenger have left those who set partners to Allah, with whom you have compact.
9.2	Go about the land for four months and know that you cannot defeat Allah and that Allah would disgrace the disbelievers.
9.3	Allah and His messenger declare openly to the people, on the Grand Day of Hajj that Allah is quit, and His messenger, of the associates- so if you leave, that is good for you; but if you disobey, know that you cannot defeat Allah. And give tidings to those who disbelieve of a chastising torment. (383)
9.4 	Excepting those of the idolators who have not fallen short of their agreements and those who do not deceitfully help others against you - to them fulfil your obligation till the end of their term - surely Allah loves those who are God-fearing.
9.5    	When the sacred period reaches its end - sever the ties with criminals on the spot, and seize them, and surround them, and keep vigil over their hideouts. But whoever repents and amends in the path of God while purifying them through spending, then allow them freedom; surely Allah is Ever-Forgiving, Most-Merciful.(384)
9.6	And if, of the idolators come to you seeking refuge, give them asylum as long as they listen to the tidings of Allah- then send them to suitable shelter, for they are a people who do not know.
9.7	How could there be a treaty for the idolators with Allah and His messenger- except those who with a sacred heart entered into a covenant? And so long as they are truthful, be honest to them; surely, Allah loves the God-fearing.
9.8	How? If they gain over you, they regard not pact nor honour in respect of you; they satisfy you with their mouths; but, their hearts reject  - and, most of them are sinful.
9.9	They exchange Allah's Signs for a worldly gain, and obstruct from His path; surely, evil was what they were doing.
9.10	They neither observe bond nor treaty towards a believer; such are the transgressors.
9.11	But if they repent and surrender to God, and spend for their purity - they are your brethren in righteousness. We make plain Our Signs for people, discerning.
9.12	And after their pact with you, if they break their agreement accusing and criticising you for your justness, then take the justice to their rejecting leaders - for, agreements have no binding on them, and that they might cease.
9.13	Should you not oppose the people who broke the sacred promises and purposed to drive out the messenger and they having started first? What, do you fear them? what befits believers is to be afraid of Allah alone.
9.14	Oppose them! Allah will help you against them, punish them at your hands, and will degrade them; and, will console the hearts of the believers.
9.15	And He will remove the anger of their hearts; and, Allah accepts the repentance from whom He will. And Allah is The Knowing, All-Wise.
9.16	Or do you think you will be left alone without knowing those of you who engaged in the just war, and those who have not taken any as intimate besides Allah, His Messenger and the believers? Allah is Aware of all you do. 
9.17	Such idolators, while they are witness against themselves to unbelief, have no right to visit Allah's houses of the righteous; their deeds have gone waste, and their abode is fire, forever.
9.18	Those who would befit visiting Allah's houses of the righteous are they who believe in Allah and the Last day, and those who obey Allah alone, and purify them by giving alms, and those who fear not, but Allah; such are the guided ones.
9.19	Do you consider slacking off a pilgrim's thirst, and who maintain the mosques on par with those who believe in Allah and the Last day, and who strive in the path of Allah? They are not equal before Allah - And, Allah will not guide the wicked.
9.20	Those who believed and exiled, and struggled in the path of Allah with their possessions and their selves, their grades are far greater with Allah; and, they are the victors.
9.21	To them the glad tiding from their God is His Mercy, good pleasure and Paradises; and, therein is their lasting bestows.
9.22	Therein they abide forever, and undoubtedly, with Allah is the Mighty reward.
9.23	O believers, if your fathers and brothers favour unbelief over belief, take them not for your administrators; if one of you take them for your administrators, they are the wrong-doers.
9.24	Say: if your fathers, your children, your brothers, and your spouses, and your relations; and, your amassed wealth, and your trades in which you fear loss, and, the dwellings you desire - are dearer to you than Allah, and His messenger and strive in His cause, then await a command from Allah. And Allah guides not the sinners.
9.25	Surely Allah has helped you in many a struggle, but on Hunain, your formidable force which elated you availed you nought; the earth, for all its vastness was straitened for you; and, you turned about, retreating.
9.26	Then Allah sent down His tranquillity upon His messenger and the believers, and with it He sent down the legions you saw not, and put the unbelievers to severe distress - such is the reward for the unbelievers.
9.27	Then, Allah forgives whom He will. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
9.28	O believers, those who are prideful, are inglorious - so, after this day, they shall not come near the blessed houses of the pious, and if you fear poverty, by the will of Allah, He would soon make you by His Mercy, needless. Surely, Allah is All-Knowing, Most Wise.(385)
9.29	The people endowed with the Book - of them whoever rejects belief in Allah and the Last day; and, who consider not as an evil which Allah and His Messenger have forbidden; and, who does not honour the truthful life - engage them until they purpose to pay their tribute.
9.30 	And the Jews call 'Uzair', son of Allah; and, the Christians call 'Christ', son of Allah - these are what they chatter, and their prattle is akin to those disbelievers before them. May Allah destroy them! Where are they turning away?
9.31	Renouncing Allah, they take to their priests, their monks and Isa, son of Maryam as Gods; but they were commanded not to submit except to One God; there is no God but He - and, He is pure from what they conjure.
9.32	They wish to blow out the Light of Allah with their mouths; but it is not that Allah will not make His Light perfect, though the unbelievers hate it. 
9.33	It is He who sent His messenger with righteousness, and in straight path that it shall supersede all walks of life, however much the idolators may hate it.
9.34	O believers, indeed many among the priests and the monks wrongfully consume the wealth of the people and hinder the path of Allah - give them the tiding of a painful punishment for those who hoard gold and silver but would not spend in the cause of Allah.
9.35	On that day they will be melted in the hellfire and branded with that on their foreheads, on their sides and their backs - "this is what you have hoarded; so, taste what you have amassed."
9.36	From the time Allah originated the skies and the earth, in the Book of God, the months are twelve; in them, four are Sacred - and, this is the straight path. Therefore, wrong-not yourselves in it; and, as the criminals plot against you all, you shall also devise against them all; verily, Allah is with those who are God-fearing.(386)
9.37    	Shifting stances deepen their deviation by which only the unbelievers have been led astray, for they allow it in a year, and deny it in another year. And that they equate that which Allah has disallowed, and make lawful to them what Allah forbids; their wickedness was made pleasing to them - and, Allah shall not guide an unbelieving people. 
9.38	O believers, when you are commanded to go forth in Allah's way, what is that you lean on to the worldly pleasures? Is it that you are satisfied with the luxuries of this world in preference to the Hereafter? Mean is the floridity when compared to the Hereafter! 
9.39	If you do not go forth, He will chastise you with a severe chastisement, and will replace you with another people; and, you will not harm Him in the least - for Allah has power over all things.
9.40	If you do not help him, verily, Allah has helped him when the unbelievers drove him out; and, in the darkness when he was one of the two, he said to his companion, "Worry not; surely, Allah is with us." Then Allah sent down peace upon him, and He fortified him with a force you cannot see, and made low the unbelievers' words- for Allah's word will be High, and Allah is Mighty, Wise.
9.41	Go forth in Allah's way, and strive with your life and with what you possess, little or much- it is the best for you if you know.
9.42	They would have followed you if it were a gain near at hand and an easy journey; but they swear by Allah and say: 'the field is far away; if we were able, we would have set out with you;' they destroy themselves; verily, Allah knows they are liars!
9.43	Allah forgive thee! Why did you give them leave without scrutinising who among them spoke the truth and who lied? 
9.44    	Those who believe in Allah and the last day, would not seek leave of you from striving in the cause of Allah with their wealth and lives. And Allah knows who fears Him.
9.45	Those who seek the permission of you are only those who do not believe in Allah and the last day; their hearts are in doubt; so, in their doubt, they waver.
9.46	And had they willed to go forth, they could have prepared for it; but, Allah hated their setting out and had stopped them from coming forth - and it was said: 'stay with those who stay behind.'
9.47	Had they set out with you, they would not have increased but chaos, and hurried about you casting mistrust among you, and wished sedition among you; and, there are among you who listen to them; and, Allah is the Knower of the unjust.
9.48	Verily, before this, they had wished confusion, and they had twisted your affairs; but, the Truth came, and Allah's design prevailed while they were averse.
9.49	And of them is he who says, "Grant me leave, and put me not to test!" Lo, they had fallen into the test!  And surely, hell will surround the unbelievers.
9.50	If good befalls you, it distresses them; if any disaster strikes you, gleefully passing by, they say, "We indeed had been careful in our affairs."
9.51	Say: "Nothing shall ever touch us except by the will of Allah. He is our Protector! And in Allah, let the believers put their trust."
9.52	Say, "Could you expect for us except any other than of the two beneficence? But as for you, we expect that Allah shall afflict you with a doom from Him or at our hands- so expect, and we do expect."
9.53	Say: "Whether you spend willingly or unwillingly, it will not be accepted from you; lo, ye were ever froward folk."
9.54	And the reason for barring their alms is that they rejected Allah and His messenger, and they do not obey their God but with aversion, and they give no charity except with hatred. 
9.55	And let not their wealth and their people astonish you; Allah intends thereby to chastise them in this life, and that they died while rejecting His Mercy.
9.56	And they swear by Allah: "We too are of you!" They are not of you, but they are a crowd of cowards.
9.57    	Should they see a hideout, or a cavern, or a trench; they would turn about and bolt away to it.
9.58	And among them are those who accuse you concerning your truthfulness; if you are lenient to them they are contented, but if you are firm, behold, they are enraged.
9.59	Should they not have been contented with what Allah and His messenger had given them and said: "Allah suffices us, and Allah will further His Mercy upon us- and His messenger; and, surely in Allah, we are pleased?"
9.60	The benefactions are for seekers, destitute, managers of their affairs, who strive for a peaceful life, and to free those in bondage or debt, and who are righteous in the path of Allah - Allah's ordainment! And Allah is Knowing, Wise.
9.61	And there are among them who hurt the prophet saying, "He is an ear!" Say, "An ear of good for you." He believes in Allah and believes the believers, and he is merciful upon who believes among you; so, whoever hurts the messenger of Allah, to them is a painful doom.
9.62	They swear to you by Allah, to please you; but, if they are believers the most fitting to please are Allah and His messenger.
9.63	Do they not understand that what awaits those who are treacherous to Allah and His messenger is hell fire wherein they abide forever? This is extreme abasement.
9.64	The hypocrites fear, 'what if a Sign were to be sent down which reveals what they hide in their breasts?' Say: keep mocking; Allah is sure to cause, to happen what you fear.
9.65	If you ask them they surely would say: we were only prattling and sporting. Say: Have you taken for sport- Allah, and His Scriptures, and His messenger?
9.66	Make no excuses; you have undoubtedly become unbelievers after believing- even if We forgive a people of you, We will punish the other for they are sinners.
9.67	Hypocritical men and hypocritical women - among them, are one of another; they induce sin and prevent from the good, and they will close their hands- they had forgotten Allah; so, has He forgotten them; indeed, the hypocrites are sinners. 
9.68	Allah has decreed hellfire for the hypocritical men and women, and for the unbelievers - therein they abide forever, and that shall suffice them; and, Allah has cursed them - and, they shall suffer lasting torment.
9.69	Similar to the people before you - they were more powerful than you, and were higher in wealth and population. They enjoyed the gains granted to them; and, you enjoyed the benefits provided to you, as much as they fancied what they got; and, you remained immersed as they stayed plunged; all their deeds ruined in this life, and in the hereafter - such are the losers.
9.70	Have not the histories of the people of Nuh before them, and the people of Aad and Samud, and the people of Ibrahim, and the people of Madyan, and of the cities overthrown ever reached them? To them, their messengers brought clear Signs; Allah has not wronged them - they wronged themselves.
9.71	The believing men and the believing women are the just companions to one another. They bid fairness and forbid wrong, and they surrender only to God; and, spend for their virtue, and, they obey Allah and His messenger; upon them shall be the Mercy of Allah. Lo! Allah is Mighty, Wise.
9.72	Allah has promised for the believing men and believing women paradises, beneath which rivers flow, and they abide therein forever; for them are ever-blooming paradises and magnificent palaces - Allah's acceptance is higher; that is the supreme triumph.
9.73	O Prophet, confront the offenders and the treacherous in the right manner, and be stern with them - their abode is hell, and an evil abode it is!
9.74	They indeed spoke offensive words, yet they deny them swearing by Allah; and, after amity is reached, they devised against it, and tried what they shall not attain - is it that they avenge Allah and His messenger for having enriched them of His bounty? Therefore, if they repent it is good for them; if they rebel, Allah will punish them with a severe punishment both in this world and in the hereafter; and, there is not a protector nor a helper for them on the earth.
9.75	And some of them swearing by Allah said, 'if Allah enriches them of His bounty, they will do good and become righteous.'
9.76	But when Allah gave them of His bounties, they became stingy and backed off, breaking away.
9.77	So Allah puts hypocrisy in their hearts as a consequence until the Day they meet Him as they kept breaking their promises to Allah, and were habitual liars. 
9.78	Do they not know that Allah knows their secrets and conspiracies - and that Allah is the Knower of the unseen?(387)
9.79	Those who ridicule the believers in charity, and deride those who do righteousness with their selves - Allah mocks them, and for them is a painful doom.
9.80	Whether you seek forgiveness for them or not,- Allah will not forgive them even if you ask forgiveness, seventy times for them. For they rejected Allah and His messenger - and Allah will not guide such sinful.
9.81	Those who sat behind were joyful for having stayed opposed to the messenger of Allah; and, being averse to strive in the cause of Allah with their wealth and lives, they say, "Do not set out in this hot summer." Say, "The hellfire is even hotter" - if only they knew.
9.82	So let them laugh a little, and cry more for what they used to earn.
9.83	When Allah brings you back to a party of them - and, if they seek your leave to go forth, say, "Never go forth with me nor will you fight an enemy with me; because you preferred to sit behind in the first place; so, sit with those who lagged."
9.84	And if one of them dies, pray not for them ever to your God nor stand over their graves; for they died as sinners, rejecting Allah and His messenger.
9.85	And let not their wealth and their children inspire you; it is that Allah surely wishes to punish them with this in this world, and that they die while they reject.
9.86	And when the command is sent down upon them that they believe in Allah and engage in just war with the messenger, the extravagant among them seek leave of you and say, "Leave us alone; we will sit with those who sit behind."
9.87	They love to sit back with those who lag; their hearts have been sealed; so, they will not understand.
9.88	Yet, the messenger and those who believed with him, fight for justice spending their wealth and lives - to them are all the right things, and they are successful.
9.89	For them, Allah has created paradises beneath which rivers flow wherein they abide forever; that is a grand victory.
9.90   	And, some of the villagers came to you with false excuses so that they may seek leave. But, they who had lied to Allah and His messenger have sat behind. A punishing torment will seize those who reject among them.
9.91	Not on the infirm, not on the ill, not on the poor who could not spend any blame - if they are truthful to Allah and His messenger, there is no way against the good people. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
9.92	Nor is there blame on those who came to you for help, and when you said, "I have no means for you;" they turned away overflowing with tears of sorrow for they found no way to spend on their own. 
9.93	The blameworthy are they, who despite being able, sought leave of you to sit with those lagged. Allah has sealed their hearts; so they will not know.
9.94	When you return to them, they bring excuses to you. Say, "Lie not; we are not to believe you; surely, Allah has revealed to us about you. Allah and His messenger will take account of you; then you will be brought before Him who knows well the secrets and that which are manifest; then He will inform you of what you did."
9.95	They swear upon Allah that you slighted them aside if you were to return to them- so slight them; surely they are impure, and hell is their abode that befits their earning.
9.96	They swear on Allah to make you satisfied about them; even if you are satisfied with them, Allah will surely not be pleased with the sinful people.
9.97	The cursed, are the worst in rejecting and in dishonesty; it is befitting that they stayed ignorant of the limits set in the Book that Allah had sent to His messenger. And Allah is All-Knowing, Most Wise.
9.98	And among the uninformed are people who consider expending, a loss, and they expect disaster to come upon you- but upon them is the turn of evil. And Allah is Hearing, Knowing.
9.99	And among the villagers are them who believe in Allah and the Last day; they believe their expenditure would bring them nearer to Allah and get them the prayers of the messenger- it indeed would take them closer; Allah will make them enter His Grace. Verily Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
9.100	And Allah is pleased with the first of the emigrants and helpers. And with those who followed them in their good deeds. And, they are pleased with Allah; and He has prepared for them paradises, beneath which rivers flow wherein they abide forever - that is the Mighty triumph.
9.101	And there are treacherous among the villagers surrounding you and in the towns are those who are habitually treacherous; you will not know them but, We know them; We will punish them twice and then, they will enter into a greater torment.
9.102	And there are who accept their guilt, but they mix up the good deeds with the evil ones - Allah might forgive them. Lo! Allah is most Forgiving, Merciful.
9.103	Extract from their wealth what is right for them, and therewith purify them their hearts and in their persons; and supplicate for them; indeed, your prayer is a source of solace for them. Allah is Hearer, Knower.
9.104	Do they not understand that Allah accepts repentance, and approves the good deeds from His servants? And Allah is Relenting, Merciful. 
9.105	And say: Proceed; certainly Allah, His messenger and the believers will be watchers over your deeds; and you will be returned to your God who knows all privacies and secrecies; and, He will inform you of what you used to do. 
9.106	And they are expecting from Allah; either they may be punished or pardoned. And Allah is Knowing, Wise
9.107	And those who erected a Mosque(388) before, to cause evil, to help in transgression, to create schisms among the believers and to make it a refuge for those who rebelled against Allah and His messenger, say, "By Allah, we indeed, intend not but good" - but surely Allah witnesses against them as "liars!"
9.108	Therefore never stand in it ever; but assuredly there is this Mosque - The House of God, built in piety from its foundation which is worthy for you to stay; and those who dwell in it are pure. And Allah does love the people, Fair.
9.109	Who is best - The one who constructed with piety, seeking Allah's contentment as the foundation or the one who sought his overriding pride as the base? And it will fall into hellfire along with him, crumbling; and, Allah does not guide the wicked.
9.110	The building they erected would be an all-time scar in their hearts - until their hearts were blown to pieces; and, Allah is Knowing, Wise.
9.111	Surely, Allah has purchased the lives, and the wealth of the believers for theirs is the paradise. They are firm in the cause of Allah - there at they sever and are severed off; He has promised this in clear terms in the Taurat, in the Injeel and the Quran. Who is best in fulfilling a promise besides Allah? So, rejoice over entering into such a trade. That is the Mighty triumph.
9.112	Those who turned in repentance, who serve Him, who revere Him, who set out in righteousness, who are humble, who surrender and those who enjoin good and forbid evil - and who fear the limits of Allah - give glad tidings to them who believe!
9.113	It does not befit the prophet or the believers to seek forgiveness for the disbelievers who are sure to be of the inmates of hellfire - even if they are of close affinity.
9.114	Ibrahim asked not forgiveness for his father but for a promise he made to him; and when he was sure his father was an enemy of Allah, he withdrew from it; unquestionably, Ibrahim had been forbearing and merciful.
9.115	And it is not that Allah should leave a people astray until He makes plain to them the forbidden - after guiding them to the straight path; and, indeed, Allah is the Knower of all things.
9.116	Verily, to Allah, belongs the kingdom of heavens and the earth - He causes life to exist and causes death, and there is none unto you a protector nor a helper besides Allah.
9.117	Allah did forgive the prophet and those who followed him in exile during hard times, and those who helped. And, He forgave when the hearts of some began to waver. Surely, upon them is His Grace and Mercy.
9.118	And the three parties that lagged - though the earth is vast, it was strait for them, painful to survive; they then knew it is Allah - but in Him, there is no refuge for them. So, Allah turned unto them that they might turn. Surely, Allah is Accepting the Repentance, Merciful.
9.119	O believers, fear Allah and be of those, truthful.
9.120	Whether they are the people of the cities or the surrounding villagers - it is not for them to sit behind the messenger of Allah and to consider themselves above him. The thirst, fatigue, the hunger they suffer in the path of Allah, and their sufferings from the enemies, provoking the wicked by mistakes - are recorded for them as good-deeds. Assuredly, Allah will not waste the rewards of the good-doers. 
9.121	And their expending, however small or big, or whatever difficulties they undergo through the straitened paths - none of it goes unrecorded for them. And Allah will give them the most beautiful reward for all that they endured. 
9.122	And the believers are not to go forth en bloc; and, that a certain of the people of every group shall remain - to strengthen them in belief, and, to admonish those who return to them haply they might beware.
9.123	O believers, be stern against those close by unjust anolate let them see firmness in you - and know that Allah is with those who fear Him. 
9.124	And when a chapter reveals there are among them who say, "Whose faith has this increased?" "It has increased the faith of those who had believed! And they are well pleased."
9.125	But in whose hearts is disease, it adds impurities upon the impurity, and they will die rejecting.
9.126	Do they not see that they are tested once or twice in a year? Even then they do not turn; nor do they reflect.
9.127	And when a chapter is made plain, they look at one another and say, "If anyone has seen you?" Then they turn away. Allah has turned away their hearts, and they are of the people who do not understand.
9.128	Surely, a messenger has come unto you from among you; if you grieve, it worries him a lot; he wishes good for you; and, he is full of mercy and compassion upon the abiding people.
9.129	If they still turn away, say, "Allah suffices me; there is no God but He; I have put my trust in Him; and, He is the King of the Mighty Throne

Chapter 10
Yunus


10.1	Alif, Laam, Raa(389) - These are the signs of the Book of wisdom
10.2     What! Is it a wonder for the humankind that We inspire a man from among them to warn them; and to give them the good tiding that for the believers there is certainly a lofty rank with their God, and he who rejects the inspiration - say, "He is a manifest sorcerer!"

10.3	Certainly your God is Allah. He created the skies and the earth in six periods; then placed His Kingdom upon the universes; and He sets right all things - but by His leave none can intercede - such is your God, Allah; so surrender before Him; will you then not mind?
10.4	All of you have to return unto Him, and Allah's words are true  Verily, He is the Creator in the first, and He would resurrect His creations again to recompense those who believed and led themselves righteously. And, who so have rejected, for them is the scalding drink and punishing chastisement for their rejection.
10.5	He, it is who made the sun shining and the moon glowing; and He created for them the changing phases to calculate the reckoning and the determination. And Allah has not created such but in Truth - His revelation, to those who know.
10.6	Indeed are the Signs in the dynamism of the night and the day; and, in what Allah has created in the skies and in the earth - for those who fear God.
10.7	Those who indeed disbelieve their meeting with us and, love this world well satisfied in it; and, those who keep rejecting Our Signs-
10.8	Fire is their abode for that they earned.
10.9	Verily, those who believed, and stood by it, God will guide them for their belief - the Delightful Heaven, rivers flow beneath them.
10.10	In it, their words will be, "O Allah, The Most Glorious, and, Peace!" And they end it with, "All glory be to Allah, the God of the worlds."
10.11	And if Allah were to hasten evil to men as the people are hasty towards the good, by now certainly their term would have ended; yet, we leave those who believe not in Our meeting, in their insolence, bewildered.(390)
10.12	And man looks up to Us while reclining or sitting or standing while in affliction; but, if We secured him of his bad, he turns away as though he did not call on Us to deliver him of his sufferings - thus, to the transgressing people their works are made beautiful.(391)
10.13	And how many a nation before you had We indeed destroyed when they were constant in corruption; and, to them, their messengers brought clear Signs; yet, they believed not - thus do We recompense those who do wrong.(392)
10.14	Then We made you successors in the land after them, to see how you behave. 
10.15	And if We Revealed to them Our clear Signs, those who believed not their meeting with Us, say, "Bring a Quran other than this, or change this!" Say: "It is not for me to change according to my whims; and, I do not believe anything other than what is Revealed to me; and, if I disobey my God, I certainly fear the doom of a Mighty Day."
10.16	Say: If Allah had wished I would not have revealed this to you; and, He would not have revealed to you about it; I indeed, have been with you for a long time before this - do you not then understand?
10.17 	Who does greater evil than he who lies on Allah or belie His Signs? And the sinners will not be prosperous.
10.18	And they worship other than Allah that shall neither do good nor harm to them; and they say, 'these will plead for us before Allah!' Say, "Do you inform Allah that which He does not know in the heavens and the earth?" He is Most Pure, and He is High above what they associate.(393)
10.19	And humanity is nought but a single origination; then they differed; and, were it not for a word preceded from your God, the matters about which they differed would be a matter long-settled between them.
10.20	And they say, "Is it not that a Sign from His God sent upon him?" So say: "What is secure, belongs to Allah; await - and, Indeed I await too, with you."
10.21	And when people are granted mercy from Us after their hardship, their follow up is to denounce Our Signs. Say, "Allah is most swift in planning; surely, Our messengers record everything that you plot."
10.22	It is He who makes your journey through the land and the sea; and you rejoice when you are in the ship, sailing by favourable winds; but, when the gusty storm with mighty waves beset it, with fear they say, "We are caught amidst!" And thereat they turn to Allah with pure hearts and say, "If You save us from this, surely, we will be grateful to You."(394)
10.23	And when He saves them, lo! They arrogantly transgress on the land - O humanity, your arrogance will only end up as pileup upon you; they enjoy a little in this world - then your return is unto Us; and, We will inform you of that you used to do. 
10.24	The similitude to this worldly life is that of the water We send down from the sky. The vast herbage of it are as foods for men and cattle; and, when it grew gorgeous with its beauty and plentifulness, the people thought 'they were powerful'; thereat, We swiped it out as if it were never there the day before when Our word came upon it by night or by day. Thus do We explain Our warnings to those who reflect.(395)
10.25	And Allah calls to the life of 'content and peace', and guides whom He wills.(396)
10.26	Whoever does good, receives good and much more to it; the shadow of darkness or disgrace shall not cover their faces; they are those who belong to the gardens of paradise, wherein would they abide. 
10.27	But whoever earns evil, their reward is similar to their evil nature; disgrace will surround them. None is there to save them from Allah; and, their faces will be like being enveloped by a part of the deep darkness of the night - they belong to the hellfire, and they shall abide therein forever. 
10.28	And on the day when We shall gather all those who associate partners, We will say, "Stay put ye and those whom ye associated!" And We will sever their ties - then, those whom they associated would say, "You never worshipped us!"
10.29	"So, Allah is sufficient as a witness between you and us; and we know not of what you did about us."
10.30	There, each will inspect their deeds and weigh their recompense - then they will be brought to their real God, Allah - and, all their imaginations will disappear from them.
10.31	Say: "Who feeds you from the sky and the earth? Or who has power over the hearing and the observation? And who brings forth life from the dead, and the death from the living? And who controls all the affairs?" They would say, "Allah!" Say, "Would you not then fear?"
10.32	Verily, it is your God, Allah, the Truth; after this what else but the path of error? Then whereto are you turning?
10.33	Thus, upon them who sin, your God's word is cast; for they do not believe.
10.34	Say, "Are there among you associates who begin creations and originate?" Say, "Allah begins creations and originates; where are you then turned to?"
10.35	Say, "Are there any of your associates who guide you to the Truth?" Say, "It is Allah who guides to the Truth; and, which befits the following - whether the One who guides you to the Truth? Or the One who has no guidance unless guided? What has happened to you? How would you judge?"
10.36	But most among them follow not but conjecture; surely, conjectures avail nought against the Truth; and, indeed, Allah is, the Knower of all they do.
10.37	And the Quran - conjured by none, but from Allah. It confirms and explains what our hands have sent forth - and, there is no doubt that this is from the God of the worlds!
10.38	Or do they say, "He has imagined this? "Say, "If you are truthful, bring a chapter like this, and collect all your possible sources but Allah."
10.39	Nay. They belie that which they cannot comprehend with their knowledge; and, thus belied those who were before. See what awaited the transgressors!
10.40	Of them some, believe in this; and some believe not in this - and your God knows the mischievous.
10.41	And if they belie you, say, "Mine is my deed, and yours is your deed; you are clear of what I do, and I am clear of what you do."
10.42	And there are some people who seem to be lending their ears to you - can you make the deaf who cannot comprehend a thing, hear you?
10.42	And some among them seem to hear you - can you make the deaf who cannot comprehend a thing, lend an ear to you?
10.43	And of them are who sees you - can you guide him though he has no vision?
10.44	Indeed Allah wrongs not a man to a date stone - yet, man harms himself.
10.45	And on the day when He gathers them all, they will know about each other that they tarried not on the earth but an hour of a day. And, those who belied their meeting with Allah had indeed fallen, and they were not in guidance.
10.46	And whether We make you see some of what We had admonished them with or We take back your soul, they are to return to Us; and, Allah is the witness to what they used to do.
10.47	And there is the messenger to each community; so when their messenger comes, justice will prevail amongst them - and, they will not be wronged.
10.48	And they say, "If you are truthful, when will be the warning?"
10.49	Say, "Except that what Allah had willed - it is not within my powers to do any good or evil to myself; to each community is a period of respite; when the Hour arrives on them, there is no advancement of it or postponement by a moment."
10.50	Say, "Beheld not thee when His torment touches you during the day or night? What do these unjust, hastily groping after?"
10.51	What! will you believe after it has reached you? Lo, here it is that which you were hastening!
10.52	And, to the unjust, it will be said: Taste the lasting torment; will you ever be repaid but for that which you earned?
10.53	And they say to you, "Is it true?" Say, "Yes, by my God, surely it is true; and you shall avert it not."
10.54	And when they see the torment, every unjust, even if he would possess the world of wealth, they would like to give them away as expiation - they will self-expose their guilt and pity; yet, justice will be executed amongst them, and they will not be wronged.
10.55	Know for sure all in the heavens and earth belong only to Allah; surely, know that the word of Allah is true - yet, most of them know not.
10.56	It is He who gives life, and causes death - then you will be brought back to Him.
10.57	O, humankind! Yes, good tiding from your God has come to you. It is soothing to your hearts - and, a guidance and a grace to those who believe.
10.58	Say, "It is because of Allah's blessings and His mercy - and, may they be content in this. And, that is much greater than what they had amassed."
10.59	Say, "Beheld ye, the grace which Allah had sent down on you?" Some of them you had allowed and some of them you had prohibited. Say, "Had Allah given you permission or you forged against Allah?"
10.60	And what do the forgers against Allah think about the Hereafter? Verily, Allah has bestowed a mighty favour upon humanity; but, most of them thank not.
10.61	And it is not that We are not a witness over your affairs, over your just utterances, and over what you do - when you are involved in them. And it is not hidden from your God an atom's weight of what is in the earth or the sky, smaller or higher, and it is not left unrecorded on a Book, clear. 
10.62	Undoubtedly, to whom Allah is the friend, he has no fear nor grief.
10.63	They are believers and will fear.
10.64	For them is the glad tiding in this world and the hereafter; there is no change in the promise of Allah - that is the mighty triumph.
10.65	And let not their speech dishearten you, for all dignity belongs to Allah - He is Hearing, Knowing.
10.66	Behold! Unto Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth; what do those who call besides Allah follow? They follow but vain thoughts, conjuring.
10.67	He created night for your comfort therein, and the day for your vision - surely in it are signs for the hearing.
10.68	They say Allah had taken a progeny. Exalted is He. He is without need, and to Him belongs all that is in the heavens and on the earth; no proof have ye for this! Say ye about Allah what ye knew not?
10.69	Say: Indeed, those who forge a lie against Allah shall not succeed.
10.70 	A mean joy of the world; but their return is unto Us; then, We shall make them taste a terrible chastisement on account of their denial.
10.71	And narrate to them about Nuh: He said to his people, "O my people, if my presence and my reminding you of the Signs of Allah is a burden to you, then I put my trust in Allah. And you with your idols, all of you, jointly decide your course on me, and decisively plant your plots against me; and, do not slacken."
10.72	But if you turn away - for, I have asked of you no wage; my recompense is with but Allah; and, I am ordained upon that I wish 'Peace'.(397)
10.73	Nevertheless they called him a liar; so, We saved him and those with him on the ship; and, We made them the landlords while We drowned who denied Our Signs - lo, and behold! What an end to those who were warned.
10.74	And after him, We kept sending messengers to his people, and they brought them clear Signs- yet, they kept rejecting that which they used to deny. Thus, We set a seal upon the hearts of the transgressors.(398)
10.75	Then We sent Musa and Harun with Our Signs to Firaun and his chieftains, but they also were unjustly arrogant. 	
10.76	So when the Truth from Us came to them, they said, "It is certainly clear sorcery!"
10.77	Musa said, "Do you call the manifest Truth sorcery? Is it sorcery? Surely, the sorcerers will not succeed."
10.78	They said, "Did you come here to deviate us from the path upon which we found our fathers, and to seek glory in the land for you two? We are not to believe in you both."
10.79 	And Firaun said, "Bring me, every sorcerer, surpassed!"
10.80	So when the sorcerers assembled, Musa said to them, "Cast your throw!"
10.81	When they cast, Musa said, "What you have brought was sorcery; surely, Allah will destroy them; indeed, Allah will not set right the deeds of the mischievous."
10.82	And Allah will uphold His words by the Truth even as the mischievous hate.
10.83	But fearing oppression from Firaun and his chieftains, most but a few of the descendants of Musa believed not; and, indeed Firaun was undisputedly the strongest in the land and was transgressing.
10.84	And Musa said, "O my people, if you are believers in Allah and truly wish peace, then put your trust in Him!"
10.85	They turned and said, "We certainly put our trust in Allah - O our God! Allow us not to become prey to the evil deeds of the unjust."
10.86	"And save us by Your Mercy from those who reject peace."
10.87 	We sent down Our Command to Musa and his brother: "You both build for your people, houses in the city. And make your houses, 'the Qibla' - the direction of worship! And in it establish the Command of your God, and give glad tiding to the believers."(399)
10.88	And Musa said, "Our God, You have given to Firaun and his chieftains the embellishments and wealth of this world and with that O our God, they make them stray away from Your path. Our God, destroy their wealth and restrain their hearts; for, they will not believe until they suffer a punishing chastisement."
10.89	And He said, "The prayer of you two is accepted; so, be firm in the straight path, and do not follow the path of the ignorant ones." 
10.90	And We caused the descendants of Israel to cross the sea, and, Firaun and his army followed them with a vengeance and intense enmity. When he began to drown, he said, "I too accept the God, whom the descendants of Israel believe, and say there is no God but He, and I am of those in surrender to Him."
10.91	"Only at this Hour? Until this moment you were certainly transgressing, and you were among the mischievous!"
10.92	"But on this day, We will preserve about you for the generations that will follow; surely, most among mankind are negligent toward Our Signs."(400)
10.93	And indeed, We made the descendants of Israel firmly placed upon the Truth and gave them the purest things; but, they did not turn away until the Wisdom came to them. Verily, your God will settle between them in that they were transgressing; and, on the Lasting Day, He would deliver the justice. 
10.94	So, if you need clarity upon We have revealed to you, ask who is in the guidance of the Book. Indeed, the Truth has come to you from your God; so be no wise of those in doubt. 
10.95	And be not of those who belie Allah's Signs; if so, you will be of the losers.
10.96	Lo! against whomever your God's word is cast, they will not believe-
10.97	Even though they see every Sign before them until they suffer a painful doom.
10.98	Why has there not been a city that believed to profit by its belief like the people of Yunus? When they believed, We removed the disgraceful suffering from them in this world, and We gave them a beautiful living until the end.
10.99	And had your God willed, all the world would have believed; so, can you force all humanity that they became believers?
10.100	And none can be of Faith except by Allah's leave; and, He lays abomination upon those who ponder not.
10.101	Say, behold the skies and the earth. Yet, the warnings and the signs avail naught to those who reject.
10.102	Do they expect but the likes of the days of those who went before them? Say: expect ye, and indeed, I expect with thee. 
10.103	We thus protect Our Messengers and the believers, and it is upon Us to protect the believing ones.
10.104	Say O humankind, if you doubt my path, I will not accept that which you call upon besides Allah; but, I call upon Allah, the One who causes you to die; and, I am ordained to remain among the believers.
10.105	And turn firmly towards righteousness- be not among the unjust.
10.106	And call not upon other than Allah that shall cause neither good nor evil to you; if you do, certainly you will be among the unjust.
10. 107	And if Allah touches you with an affliction, there is none to dispel it except Him, and if He wishes good to you, none shall halt His bestow. He delivers it to whom He wills of His bondsmen. And He is Most Forgiving, Merciful.
10.108	Say O humankind, indeed from your God the Truth has come unto you; therefore whosoever of you takes to the guidance, he takes it for his good, and whosoever goes astray,  goes astray only against it; and, I have no authority to set right your affairs.
10.109	And follow only that which Allah inspires into you as 'wahi' - the revelation, and until Allah delivers, remain firm in patience; and, He is the best of the judges.

Chapter 11
Hud

11.1	Alif, Laam, Raa(401). The Book - the Signs of wisdom; then in clear revelation from the All Knowing, Most Wise.
11.2	"Call not besides Allah; verily, I am a warner and bringer of good tidings to you from Him."
11.3	And, "Turn to God seeking His forgiveness; He would allow you a living till a term determined, and He will increase His grace upon the graceful. But if you disobey, I certainly fear for you the torment of a mighty day."
11.4	"Your return is unto Allah, and He has power over all things."
11.5	Behold, they cover their hearts to hide them from Him; even if they cover with clothing, He knows their secrets and openness; for, verily, He knows all that is hidden in their breasts.
11.6	And there is not a creature on earth whose provisions are not taken care of by Allah, and He knows where they wander and where they settle - all of which are in His Book, clear.
11.7	And He created the skies and the earth in six periods - and, His reign was upon the water, and that He tries you therewith to make manifest whose deeds are best amongst you. If you say, "verily, you will come back to life again," the deniers will indeed say, "It is but a cypher, clear."
11.8	And when We postponed the torment for the term fixed, they would indeed say, "What prevented it?" Lo, beheld not they, it will not be averted from them on the day when their torment is due, and what would beset them is their mocking?
11.9	And if We make man taste Our grace bestowed on him, and then remove it from him, indeed he is heartbroken, ungrateful.
11.10	And after his grief if We make him taste the goodly gift from Us, he would surely say, "All my evil has gone!" Verily, he is overwhelmingly joyful, proud.
11.11	But whoever endures and does good deeds, to them is forgiveness and a mighty reward.
11.12	Your heart might have trembled at their thought of rejecting certain of the revelation sent down upon you, when they said, "Should it not be that a treasure is sent down on him? Or should an angel come along with him? You indeed are no other than a warner, and Allah is in charge of all things.
11.13	Or do they say, "He has invented it?" Say, "Bring ten chapters then, the like of it, invented; and, gather ye, all the able! Except for Allah, if you speak truly."
11.14	And if they do not answer, know for sure, this is the wisdom of Allah, and there is no God to provide but He - "Will you then be at peace with Allah?"
11.15	If anyone desires this worldly life and the glamour of it, We will give away that they desired for in this world itself, and will not lessen therein.
11.16	There is not but hellfire for such of these in the hereafter. All they did have perished and, what they do is vanity.
11.17	The believers in it are them with clarity from their God, and witnesses have come from God and, to whom the Book of Musa is guidance and mercy before this. But who so rejects this among the communities - their assured abode is hellfire; so, be not in doubt concerning this; and, this is unquestionably the truth from your God, but most men do not believe.
11.18	And who is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah? Such will be brought before their God. And the witness would say, "These are they who forged against their God." May upon the transgressors be the curse of Allah.
11.19	They hinder the path of Allah, and wish crookedness in it; these are they who disbelieve in the hereafter.
11.20	They cannot defeat in the land, and there is none for them but Allah as helpers. And their punishment will be doubled - they have lost their hearing ability, and they cannot see.
11.21	Those who wronged themselves, and all their imaginations will disappear from them.
11.22	No doubt, they will be the greatest losers in the time to come.
11.23	Indeed, those who believe and do good deeds, and surrender to their God - they are inhabitants of heaven, and they will abide therein. 
11.24	The parables to these two are like the ones that are deaf and blind - and the other, who could see and hear; are these equal in comparison? Do you not give thought?
11.25	And verily, We had sent Nuh to his people: "I am to you, a plain warner."
11.26	"Call not besides Allah - indeed I fear for you the day of great torment."
11.27	The leaders of his community who rejected him said, "We do not see you but as a man, as we are; and, we see not those who follow you but the ones despised and mindless amongst us; and, we do not consider you any better than us - nay, we think you are liars."
11.28	He said, "Bethink ye O my people, while I am upon the Clarity from my God and He has bestowed me of His Grace, and if it has been made obscure to you - yet, while you are averse to it, can I force you into it?"
11.29	"And O my people, I do not ask any wage from you for this; my wages are with none but Allah, and so it is not that I send away the believers; indeed, they are to meet their God. But I see you as the ignorant ones."  
11.30	And, "Bethink not O my people, if I turn them away, who will save me from Allah?"
11.31	"And I did not say I possess Allah's favours nor do I know the secrets; and I did not say, 'I am an angel'; and I did not say, "Allah will not bestow His blessings upon the ones whom your eyes see as the most despised." Allah knows what is in their breasts - indeed, then, I too will be unjust."
11.32	They said, "O Nuh, you had argued with us; and disputed with us a great deal. So bring us what you promised for us if you are truthful.  
11.33	He said, "If Allah so wills, certainly it is He who will bring it to you and you will not avert it."
11.34	And, "Even if I admonish you, if Allah's will is to keep you astray, my good counsel will not profit you - He is your God and unto Him will be your return."
11.35	Or do they say, "He has forged it?" Say, "If I have forged it, the sin is upon me; but I am clear of your sins." 
11.36	And it was said to Nuh: "Except those who believed, none in your community will ever believe hereafter; so, do not worry about what they do."
11.37	"And build the ship under Our supervision and instruction; and, speak not with me about the wrongdoers; no doubt, they will be drowned."
11.38	And while he was building the ship, he was mocked at by the leaders of his community every time they passed him. He said, "If you mock us, we will mock you as you mock."
11.39	"And you will know shortly, to whom the despising torment will come, and upon who a lasting torment will descend."
11.40	Finally when Our command came, and the oven overflowed, We said, "Embark pairs of every livestock in the ship - embark in it of your family and the believers except upon whom Our word has foregone." But for a very few, most did not believe with him.(402)
11.41	And said he, "Embark in it - only in the Name of Allah is its sailing and anchoring; verily, my God is Forgiving, Merciful."
11.42	Then the ship carried them between the waves like mountains. Nuh said to his son, who was aloof, "My dear son, embark in it with us; be not among the deniers."
11.43	He said, "I will climb up on a mountain that would save me from water." Said he, "No one would be spared on this day from the decree of Allah except to whom His mercy has gone forth." And, then and there a mighty wave rose between the two, and he was among the drowned.
11.44	Then it was said, "O earth, swallow down the water! And O sky, stop forthwith! The water receded and the job was over; and, it rested on the mount Judy. It was said, "Away with the unjust people."
11.45	And Nuh said to his God, "O my God! surely my son is of my family, and Your promise is true indeed, and You are the most just of the judges."
11.46	Said He, "O Nuh, verily he is not of your family; his deeds indeed were vile; so, speak not to Me about that you know not; I admonish you lest you will be among the ignorant."
11.47	He said, "O my God, I seek refuge in You from asking that of which I do not know; unless You forgive me and have mercy on me, I will be among the losers!"
11.48	It was said: "O Nuh! Go ye forth and with your people with peace and abundance from Us and upon the people who are with you; and, We will make some people enjoy, and then, a painful torment from Us will seize them."
11.49	"Such are from the hidden source, and We revealed this to you; not you, nor your people were knowing this before- be patient! Surely, the end is for the God-fearing."   
11.50	And to Aad, their brethren Hud: He said, "O my people! Call upon only Allah; there is no God to you but He; not you are but liars!"
11.51	"O my people, I ask of you not my wages; my wages are only with my Creator; will you not understand?"
11.52	And, "O my people seek forgiveness from your God and turn in repentance to Him; and, He will shower upon you continuous rain from the sky, and He will increase your might upon might; and, turn not away in sin."(403)
11.53	They said: "O Hud! You have brought us no clear proof, and we are not to leave our gods on your saying, and we are not believers in you."
11.54	"We only say that some of our gods have seized you with a curse. He said, "I surely make Allah the witness! And you bear witness too that I am clear of all that you associate."
11.55	"Besides Him, gather ye all and plot against me, and give me no respite."
11.56	"Surely I have put my trust in Allah, my God and your God. He holds a firm grip on the frontal hair of every creature; my God indeed, is on the path, righteous."
11.57	"So, if you turn away, I have surely conveyed to you that with which I was sent to you; and, my God will replace you with a people other than you, and you cannot harm Him at all; verily, my God is protective over all things."
11.58	And when Our Command came, We saved Hud and those who believed with him by Our Mercy - And We rescued them from a hard chastisement.
11.59	Such are the Aad - they rejected the Signs of their God and schemed against His Messengers; and, they surrendered to every froward potentate.(404)
11.60	So, curse followed them both in this world and in the hereafter; lo! Indeed Aad devised against their God, and behold! Curse be upon the people of Hud, - Aad.
11.61	And to Samud, We sent their brethren Salih - He said: "O my people! Call upon Allah alone; there is no God but He; He created you from the earth and made therein your living; so, seek forgiveness from Him, and turn to Him in repentance - Surely, my God is Near, Hearing."
11.62	They said, "O Salih, before this, you were trustworthy among us; do you forbid us worshipping that our fathers worshipped? And we are surely in great doubt about to which you call us."
11.63	He said, "Bethink ye, my people? When I possess clear proof from my God, and while He has graced me, if I disobey Him - who will help me against Allah; and you will not but increase me, my loss."
11.64	And O my people, as a Sign unto you - here is a she-camel from Allah; and so, allow it to graze on Allah's land, and do not intend harm to it; if so, very soon you will suffer distress." 
11.65	But they hamstrung it. So he said, "Be joyful in your houses for three days; this is a decree you shall not belie."
11.66	So, when Our Command came, We saved Salih and those who believed with him by Our Mercy - and, from the disgrace of that day; Surely, your God - He is Exalted, Mighty.
11.67	And a thunder burst seized the wrongdoers! So, they lay dead in their houses.
11.68	As though they had never inhabited therein; verily, the people of Samud disobeyed their God - lo, far away with 'samud'.
11.69	Surely, Our messengers visited Ibrahim with the good tidings, and said, "Peace!" He said, "Peace." And he has not hesitated to offer a roasted calf.
11.70	But he became suspicious when he found their hands did not go to it, and he was afraid of them. They said, "Fear not! We indeed have been sent to the people of Lut."
11.71	Then his wife was by his side- she smiled when we gave them the good tidings of Ishaq and after Ishaq, Yaqub. 
11.72	She said, "Surprising! Will I bear a child when I am old and here my husband, an older man too? Surely surprising, this!"
11.73	They said, "Are you surprised Allah is able over His word? May Allah's mercy and His blessings abound the household. Verily, He is Glorious, Exalted."
11.74	And when the fear from Ibrahim is gone by the glad news, he began arguing with us about the people of Lut.
11.75	Surely Ibrahim was enduring, imploring and oft-returning.
11.76	"O Ibrahim, forsake this, for your God's command has certainly gone forth, and it is that the torment to come upon them is impending."
11.77	And when Our messengers came to Lut, he grew sad about his people, and with a straitened heart, he said, "This is a day of great grief!"
11.78	And his people came rushing to him who used to indulge in abominations - he said, "O my people- here, my daughters; they are pure for you; so, fear Allah! And disgrace me not in my guests; is there not a single right-minded among you?"
11.79	They said, "Surely you know well your daughters are not of our interest, and you know our desires."
11.80	He said, "Lo! I should have enough strength to stop you or I should lean on to strong support."
11.81	They said, "O Lut, we are surely the messengers of your God; they cannot reach you up; so, go forth in a portion of the night - with your family, without your wife, and none shall look back; the disaster to strike them will strike her too; early morning indeed is their appointed Hour. Is the morning not nigh?"
11.82	So, when Our command came We turned its uppermost nethermost and rained hot clay stones upon them.
11.83	Marked from your God- it is never far away from the evil ones.
11.84	And We sent to the people of Madyan, their brethren Shuaib: he said, "O my people, call upon only Allah; there is no other God but Him; and, reduce not in your measure and balance; I see you in good fortune; but, I do fear the torment of a day that would beset you."
11.85	And, "O my people, perfect your measure and balance with justice; reduce not their goods, and go not about the land spreading corruption."
11.86	"If you are believers, what Allah leaves behind for you is good to you, and I am not a watcher over you." 
11.87	They said, "O Shuaib! Does your prayer force us to abandon the deities our forefathers worshipped or restrict spending our wealth in the way we desire? Ah, how caring and righteous!"
11.88	He said, "O my people, behold not thee! While I am upon a clear sign from my God, and when He has blessed me with beautiful sustenance- I shall not reject for myself that which I forbid for you. So far as I am able, I wish but reform; and, my success is not but by Allah's help; in Him, I put my trust; and unto Him, I turn."
11.89	And, "O my people, let not your hatred against me seize you like that which seized the people of Nuh, or the people of Hud, or the people of Salih; - and, the people of Lut are not far away from you.
11.90	"So seek forgiveness from your God and repent to Him; verily, my God is Most Merciful, affectionate."
11.91	They said, "O Shuaib, we do not understand much of what you say; certainly we see you as the weakest among us; but for your family, we would have stoned you to death, and you have no power against us."
11.92	He said, "O my people, do you hold my family more powerful than Allah? You have pushed Him behind your backs; surely, my God encompasses all you do."
11.93	And, "O my people, act as you think; I act too - you will know soon on who will descend a disgraceful punishment, and who a liar is; so, expect ye! Surely, I too expect with thee."
11.94	And when Our Command came, We saved Shuaib and those who believed with him by Our Mercy; and, a blast seized the wrongdoers - the morning found them lay prostrated in their dwellings.
11.95	As if they have never dwelled therein! So, away with Madyan, as away with Samud.
11.96	And indeed We sent Musa with Our Signs, and authority clear.
11.97	To Firaun and his chieftains; they were then in submission to Firaun's laws; but, Firaun's laws were inhumane. 
11.98	On the day of resurrection, he would lead them to hell; what an evil destination to be shown!
11.99	And a curse was made to follow them then and ever; wretched is their reward.
11.100	History of the nations! We revealed them to you- of them, there are remains, and of them, are destroyed.
11.101	And We wronged them not, but they wronged themselves; and, when the command came from your God, the deities they had been calling upon other than Allah, availed them no- and, they increased them but in ruin.
11.102	And thus is when your God seizes a wrongful nation. Indeed, His seizure will be painfully severe, tormenting.
11.103	Lo, herein is the Sign for the believers in the Hour of punishment- the Hour, all humankind shall be gathered. And, it is the Hour of witness.
11.104	And We do not defer it but for a term determined.
11.105	When the Hour comes, none can speak, save by His leave; and, among them will be wretched, blessed. 
11.106	The wretched will be in the fire- in it for them will be loud groaning and moaning.
11.107	But for the will of God, they will abide therein as long as the heavens and the earth endure; verily, your God does what He determines.
11.108	And the blessed ones will be in heaven- but for the will of God they will abide therein as long as the heavens and the earth remain - and it is an endless grace.
11.109	So worry not about their rituals- they only are upon what their forefathers towed; certainly, We will pay back their portion in full, undiminished.  
11.110	And indeed, We gave Musa the Book- but they engaged in vain debate therein; and, had it not been for a word from your God, the matter would have been settled amongst them. And indeed they are in doubt thereof.
11.111	And to each of them your God will justly recompense in full according to their deeds; Undoubtedly, He is well aware of what they do.
11.112	So, stand ye steadfast and those who repented with you as Commanded, and transgress not; lo! He is Seer of what ye do.
11.113	And lean not on those who do wrong; if you do so, the hellfire will seize you- there is no saviour for you save Allah, nor will ye be helped.
11.114	And be constant in Allah's remembrance at both the ends of the day and in parts of the night; indeed, the good deeds do away with the evil deeds. That is a good tiding for those who ponder.
11.115	And observe patience. Verily, Allah wastes not the goodly reward of those who do beautiful deeds.
11.116	Should there have not been some wise ones in the land before, which should have forbidden the mischiefs, save a very few? And We delivered them; the wrongdoers followed only their rich arrogance and were sinners.
11.117	And your God does not destroy a city unjustly, while its folks are reforming.
11.118	And had your God willed, He would have made all people one nation, yet they indulge in differing.
11.119	They were thus made except on whom God's mercy is. And, the word of your God, "I will fill up the hell with everyone from among the jinns and the men," will fulfil. 
11.120	And We have narrated to you all about the Messengers to make your heart firm. In these are the truth, the excellent tiding and mindfulness for you and the believers.(405)
11.121	And say to the unbelievers: you act to your will, and indeed we do our part.
11.122	And expect ye! We expect too!
11.123	And the secrets of the heavens and earth belong only to Allah; to Him, all affairs return; so, call upon Him and rely upon Him; and, God is not unaware of what you do.


Chapter 12
Yusuf

12.1	A L R(406) - These are the Signs of the Book, clear.
12.2	We indeed sent it down in Arabic as Quran, that you might know.(407)
12.3	By bestowing this Quran upon you through inspiration, We narrate to you a beautiful history - before this, you were of those, knew not.
12.4	When Yusuf said to his father, "O my father, I did see eleven stars, the sun and the moon; I saw them bowing to my command." 
12.5	He said, "O my son, do not reveal your vision to your brothers; they will plan a plot against you, for indeed, shaitan is an open enemy to man.
12.6	"Thus will your God choose you to teach the wisdom of hadiths, the visions. And, perfect His Grace upon you and the descendants of Yaqub - in much the same way as before you. He perfected His Grace upon both your forefathers Ibrahim and Ishaq; verily, your God is All-Knowing, Wise."
12.7	Surely, in Yusuf and his brothers are explicit knowledge for those who bethink.
12.8	When said, "Yusuf and his brother are dearer to our father than us while we are a strong group; and, surely our father is in clear error."
12.9	"Kill Yusuf! Or throw him away in a land; your father will then be close to you; after that, you may amend to be good ones."
12.10	One among them said, "Kill not Yusuf! If you decide to do something, then leave him inside a deep well; some traders might pick him up."
12.11	They said, "O our father, why do you not believe us concerning Yusuf? While we sincerely wish him good."
12.12	"Tomorrow send him with us. He will be eating and playing, and surely, we shall take good care of him." 
12.13	He said, "It certainly saddens me that you should take him along; and, I fear a wolf might eat him up while you are heedless of him."
12.14	They said, "If a wolf should eat him up while we are a band, then we certainly are losers."
12.15	So when they counselled together to take him and leave him in a deep well, at that, We inspired him, "You will tell them of their deed, while they know not."
12.16	And, after dusk they came to their father, crying.
12.17	They said, "O our father, we left Yusuf with our goods, and were playing faraway; a wolf had eaten him -  but you will not believe us even if we tell the truth."
12.18	And they brought with them his shirt with false blood. He said, "Nay, your mind had made fair to you a deed, abominable; so, comely patience! And it is Allah who shall I seek help concerning what you say."
12.19	Then there came a caravan; they sent one of them to fetch water; he let down his pail - then yelled out, "Good tidings here, a kid!" And they had hidden him as merchandise. And Allah was fully aware of all they did.
12.20	And they sold him for a paltry price, a countable few silver; and, they had no concern for him.
12.21	And the one who bought him in Misr, said to his wife, "Keep him as a blessing; might be a good omen to us, or we will adopt him as our son." And thus we gave Yusuf, comfort in the land. And We taught him hadiths, wisdom. And Allah is successful in His affairs, but most men do not understand.
12.22	And when he reached his prime, We gave him the Wisdom and the Criterion; thus do We recompense the righteous.
12.23	And the woman where he was living, lustfully bolted the doors, said, "Come on, you!" He said, "I seek refuge in Allah; verily, my Lord has kept me dignified- and, wrongdoers will never succeed."
12.24	But she lusted for him; had he not envisioned his God, he too would have fallen to her. Thus did We remove from him the evil and abomination; indeed, he was of Our sincere servants.
12.25	And they raced with each other to the door; she tore his shirt from behind; they both saw her husband thereat, at the door. She said, "What punishment will you give to him who sought evil to your wife, other than imprisonment or a painful punishment?"
12.26	He said, "She forced me to come to her!" One of her relatives said, "If his shirt was torn in front, she speaks the truth, and he is the liar."
12.27	"But, if his shirt is torn from behind, she is lying, and he is truthful."
12.28 	So when he saw the shirt was torn from behind, said, "It is indeed evil works of ye; verily, your works are deviltry."
12.29	"Yusuf, leave it at this- seek forgiveness for your sin; undoubtedly, you are of the sinners."
12.30	And, women in the city were saying, "The wife of Aziz had forced luring a young boy; her lust has possessed her - we indeed, see her in manifest error."
12.31	So, when she heard about the women slandering her, she hosted a feast for them and received them all in a beautiful(408) manner. Then said, "Go to them, serve(409)!" The moment they saw him, senses lost(410), they got red-handed(411) - they said, "Glory be to Allah; he is not a human being, and he is none but a noble angel."
12.32	She said, "He is the one about whom you were slandering me; verily, I forced him to fall to my desire;- but he preserved him; and, if he continues to disobey, surely he will be sent to jail, and certainly will be of the disgraced." (412)
12.33	He said, "O my God, I prefer jail to that which they call me, and if you do not save me from them, I will be a prey to them and become ignorant."
12.34	So, his God accepted his prayer- He averted their plans against him. Indeed, He is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
12.35	Despite the evidence, it seemed probable to them that he would be imprisoned for a time.
12.36	And with him entered his cell, two young prisoners. One of them said, "Indeed, I dreamt I was making grape juice." And the other said, "I certainly dreamt I was carrying bread on my head and the birds were eating thereof." "Explain to us about these; indeed, we see you as good-doers."
12.37	He said, "Not the food(413) you are provided with will reach you both, but I will explain the meanings of it to you before it comes to you; that is of what my God has taught me; certainly, I have abandoned the path of the people who reject Allah and disbelieve in the last day."
12.38	"And, I am following the righteous path of my forefathers Ibrahim, Ishaq, Yaqub; it does not befit us associating anything to Allah - this, a Mercy upon us and all the people, from Allah; but most men show not gratitude."
12.39	"O the two companions of the prison! Which is good - the presence of different gods differing, or Allah, the One God, Supreme?"
12.40	"Those whom you worship besides Him are but what you have named, you and your fathers! Allah has not sent down a proof for them; no one has the Authority, except the One, Allah; and, He has ordained that none shall be called upon but Him - this is the straight path. But most men understand this not."(414)
12.41	"O my two companions of prison, one of you will serve his master with wine, and the other will be crucified and the birds will eat of his head- the matter is decided whereon ye twain enquire."  
12.42	And said to those he knew would be freed, "Say to your master about me." But Shaitan made him forget to tell his master." So it was that he stayed in prison for some more years.
12.43	And the king said, "Verily I dreamed of seven fat cows, eaten by seven lean ones; and, seven fresh ears and some dried ears. O Assembly! Reveal my dream to me if you are expounders of dreams."
12.44	They said, "Dreams are complex! We are not expounders of such dreams."
12.45	Remembering after a long time, the one of the two who was freed from the prison said, "I will inform you of this dream; so, send me!"
12.46	"O Yusuf, the Truthful! Please explain us seven lean cows feeding upon seven fat cows, and then seven fresh ears and some others dried. And I am to return for they are to know."
12.47	Said he, "You will cultivate for seven continuous years; eat the little that you consume and leave the rest in its ears."
12.48	"Then will follow seven hardest; they will eat up all that you have stored for it, but a very few!"
12.49	 "Then a year would follow wherein will be good rain for the people, and in it, they will be cherishing."
12.50	And the king said, "Bring him to me!" When the envoy came to Yusuf, he said, "Go back to your king and ask him about the truth of the women who wronged with their own hands? Surely my God is Aware of their plot."
12.51	He said, "What happened to you when you called Yusuf to submit to your desire?" The women said, "May Allah save us; we never saw any misbehaviour in him." The wife of Aziz said, "Now the truth has come out. I only forced him to submit to my desire! Surely, he is truthful."
12.52	"It is that he may know that I did not intend wrong in his absence, and to announce that surely Allah does not allow evil to succeed."
12.53	"Nor is it that I have purified my soul of sins, for the desires do induce evil - unless my God bestows Mercy. Surely, my God is Most Forgiving, Most Merciful."
12.54	And the king said, "Bring him to me; I will keep him close to me." So he said to him, "Henceforth, with us, you are the most honoured and trustworthy."
12.55	He said, "Authorise me over the storehouses of the land; I am a knowing guardian."
12.56	And thus We settled Yusuf in the land so that he could have a good hold therein; We bestow Our Mercy on whom We will, and We will not waste the reward of the good-doers.
12.57	And the reward of the believing pious, in the Hereafter, is far greater.
12.58	And then when the brothers of Yusuf came and entered, he had identified them, but they knew him not.
12.59	And when he prepared and gave them their portion, he said, "Bring me a paternal brother of yours- see ye not how good I received you and that I benevolently measured for you?"
12.60	"If you do not bring him to me, there is no provision for you with me, nor shall you come near me."
12.61	They said, "We will solicit him from our father; that we will do."
12.62	And he said to his servants, "Put back their merchandise in their saddlebags; on reaching home when they know it, they might return."
12.63	So when they returned to their father, they said: "O our father! Our measures will be denied; so, send our brother also with us; we will bring our measured provisions, and surely we will guard him well." 
12.64	He said, "Should I believe you concerning him as I believed you concerning his brother before? But Allah is the best of the protectors- He is the Most Merciful of the merciful ones."
12.65	And when they opened their saddlebags, they saw their merchandise returned to them. They said, "Our father! What shall we seek? Here, our merchandise is returned to us; therefore we will bring grains for our family, and we will guard our brother, and we will bring additional camel loads of grain; this is only a small measure."
12.66	He said, "I will not send him with you unless you pledge to me by Allah that you will bring him to me unless a calamity seized all of you; and, when they pledged, he said, "Allah is the Guardian over what we have said!"
12.67	And he said, "O my sons! Go not in by the same gate, but enter by different gates; I cannot avail you in aught against Allah; all decree is except with Allah; in Him, I put my trust and in Him let all the trusting put their trust."
12.68	Though they followed their father Yaqub's wish by entering the gates, it availed them nought as against Allah; he was indeed, well informed of what We had taught him but most among men will not understand this.
12. 69	And when they came before Yusuf, he took his brother and said, "Surely I am your brother; grieve not for what they did!"
12.70	Then, when he provided their provisions, he placed his measuring bowl into the saddlebag of his brother- an announcer cried, "O cameleers! Surely ye are thieves!"
12.71	They came before them and said, "What have you lost?"
12.72	They said, "We have lost the King's measuring bowl!" Whoever brings it, he will have a camel load; I own responsibility."
12.73	They said, "By Allah, you know well we have not come here for chaos in the land; neither we are thieves."
12.74	They said, "If you are liars, what shall be your punishment?"
12.75	They said, "The punishment is the person in whose baggage it is found! We thus punish the unjust."
12.76	So he examined other bags before his brother's bag; then he brought it forth from his brother's bag. Thus We gave a plan to Yusuf. But for Allah's will, by the King's rule, he could not retain his brother - We raise in degrees whom We will. There is a Wise-One above every intellect.
12.77	They said, "If he has stolen, then surely a brother of his has stolen before!" Yusuf kept it within him, not revealing it to them. He said, "You are worse in ranks; Allah knows best that which you allege."
12.78	They said, "O Aziz, surely he has an aged father, and so in his place take one of us; we indeed consider you as one considerate."
12.79	He said, "May Allah save us from taking anyone other than him with whom we saw our goods. We will then surely be the wrongdoers."
12.80	So when they lost their hopes with him, they counselled in private; among them, the good one said, "Don't you understand your father had taken your pledge by Allah, and that you had done a great injustice concerning Yusuf before? So unless my father permits or Allah makes His decision on me, I will never leave this land. And He is the Best of judges."
12.81	"Go back to your father and say: "Our father! Certainly, your son has stolen; we say not but what we know, and we are not protectors over the unseen."
12.82	And "You can enquire the town people where we stayed and the cameleers - and, surely we tell the truth."
12.83	He said, "Nay. Your mind has induced you of a wrong thing; still, a beautiful endurance! Allah is sufficient to bring them all to me; surely He is All-Knowing, Wise.'
12.84	Then he turned away from them, said: "Yusuf, My grief!" Over grieved, his eyes have become whitish, but he endured.
12.85	They said, "By Allah, you will not cease of Yusuf, until you die in anguish, and terminally ill.
12.86	He said, "I submit only to Allah my anguish and sorrow; and, I know from Allah what you know not."
12.87	"My sons, set forth! Search for, and enquire about Yusuf and his brother, and despair not about Allah's great favour; indeed, but for the rejecters will not despair about Allah's mercy."
12.88	So when they came before him and said, "O Master, a great grief has seized our family; we have with us only a little amount; measure us in full and give us as a charity; verily, Allah gives goodly reward to those who give charity."
12.89	He said, "Do you know what you did to Yusuf and his brother when you were ignorant?"
12.90	They said, "Really are you, Yusuf?" Said he, "Yes, I am Yusuf, and he is my brother- Allah has indeed bestowed Mercy upon us. Those who fear God, and observe patience- Allah, surely will not waste the reward of the good-doers."
12.91	They said, "By Allah, though we have sinned against you, Allah has indeed preferred you over us."
12.92	He said, "This day there is no charge against you; may Allah forgive you, and He is the Most Merciful of the merciful ones."
12.93	"Take this, my shirt and put it on my father's face, and he will regain sight; and, bring all your kindred to me."(415)
12.94	And when the caravan parted, their father said, "Certainly I sense the smell of Yusuf, but I doubt you call me dotard."
12.95	Said they, "By Allah! You are in your false sense as ever."
12.96	Then, when the bringer of good news put it on his face, he regained his sight. He said, "Did I not say to you, I know from Allah that which you do not know?"(416)
12.97	They said, "Our father, seek forgiveness for us for our sins; surely, we had wronged."
12.98	He said, "I will seek forgiveness for you from my God; surely, He is Forgiving, Merciful."
12.99	When they came in, to Yusuf, he preserved his father and mother with him and said, "If Allah wills, enter the city of Misr without fear."
12.100	And he raised his parents upon the Throne of wisdom; and, the others too fell in prostration. He said, "O my father, this is the truth of my earlier dream; my God made it true. And after He had delivered me out of prison- and, after Shaitan caused division between my brothers and me, He had surely bestowed a great favour upon me by bringing you from the village. Verily, my God is Most Gentle in what He wills; indeed, He is All-Knowing, Wise."
12.101	"My God, You have indeed given me the Kingdom, and taught me the secret hadiths; O the Creator of the heavens and earth, You are my Saviour now and forever; receive me unto You while I am in peace with You; and, join me with the righteous."
12.102	This is of the secrets, unseen; We reveal it to you, and you were not among them when they concertedly devised their evil plots."
12.103	And however earnest may ye be, most among men will not believe.
12.104	And you do not ask them wages for it; it is but a clear conscience, unto all.
12.105	And how many a portent in the heavens and earth! But they pass by them, slighting.
12.106   And most of them believed not in Allah except with partners unto Him.
12.107	Are they fearless of the punishment of Allah surrounding them or that their end shall come to them of a sudden when they are not aware?
12.108	Say: "This is my way; I am calling you to Allah; I and those who follow me are on clear Signs. Allah is most Pure, and I am not of them who set up partners to Allah."
12.109	And We sent before you none but the men of their towns - We inspired them; and, have they not gone about the earth and seen how the ends of the people before them were? Do you not understand that the final abode shall be the best for those who fear God?
12.110	And when the messengers thought they were indeed belied and all hopes were lost, Our help came to them; then whom We saved whom We willed - Our punishment will not be averted from the people, unjust.
12.111	Indeed in their revelations are the Signs for the Knowing - This is not hadiths, conjured, but testifies everything before them, and it explains every affair and the straight path and mercy for the believing people.

Chapter 13
Thunder

13.1	A L M R(417) - These are the Signs of the Book, clear. And it is the Truth revealed to you from your God; yet, most of mankind do not believe.
13.2	Allah is He who raised the heavens without a pillar, and you see it; then He set His kingdom upon it; and, He has the sun and the moon under His order, and all of them move by His rules, and for a period determined- and that He decides their affairs. He explains the Signs such that you may affirm that you shall meet your God.
13.3	And He, it is who made the earth bountiful and placed firmly therein mountains and made rivers; and, in it, He created in pairs every kind of fruit; and, He covers the night with the day - indeed, herein is the Sign for those who reflect.
13.4	And on the earth are adjoined lands with gardens of grapevines, fields sown, and the date-palms of single or multiple stems. Though they have the same water source, the fruits of some excel that of the others; indeed, in it are clear Signs to the thoughtful.
13.5	And if you are surprised, the astonishing thing is that they say, "Will we surely be into a new life after we are dust?" They reject their God; they have shackles on their necks and are the inhabitants of hell wherein they abide.
13.6	And they hasten you on the evil before the good, and before them are the punishing examples. And indeed, your God is relenting towards people for their sins, and your God certainly is severe in retribution.
13.7	And the rejecters say about you, "Should not be a Sign sent down upon him from His God?" You are only a warner! And for every person, a Guide!
13.8	Allah knows what every female bear in her womb, and its shrinking and expansion; and with Him is a measure for everything.
13.9	He is the Knower of the secrets, and that is plain. He is Most Exalted, Most High.
13.10	It is the same whether any of you keep your speech secret or open; and, he who lurks in the darkness of night, or he who walks in the shine of the day.
13.11	Unto him are protectors who go forth before and behind by Allah's command; Allah indeed changes not the people's position, unless they change their nature. And when Allah intends ill for a people, there is none to avert it - and, for them, there is no Helper but He.
13.12	It is He who shows you the lightning that causes fear and hope and creates the laden clouds.
13.13	And the thunder glorifies His purity, and the angels also fear Him with awe; and, He sends down thunderbolts by which He strikes whom He wills; yet, they dispute about Allah while He is All-Mighty. 
13.14	To Him is the right call; whoever calls besides Him shall not answer them, and it is like the one who spreads out his both hands for the water to reach his mouth - it will not get to the mouth; and, the prayer of the non-believers is but in error.
13.15	And all who are in the heavens and the earth obey only Allah willingly or unwillingly, as do their shadows in the morning and evening.
13.16	Say, "Who is the God for the heavens and the earth?" Say, "He is Allah!" Say, "Do you take protectors besides Him? They cannot do good or harm in aught to themselves." Say, "Are the blind and the seer, same? Or is the darkness and the light the same? Or have that which they had associated created anything like what Allah had created? If so, they might have doubted concerning 'the Creation'." Say, "Allah creates all things, and He is the Controller."
13.17 	He sends down rain from the sky; then the streams run to their measures, and the floods carry the swelling foam. Such foams do float when you melt things under fire to make ornaments and other things; thus, Allah distinguishes between the Truth and evil; the dirty foam gets blown away, and all that is beneficial to man settle down in the earth - Allah thus exemplifies. 
13.18	There is a goodly reward for those who follow their God, and as for those who do not follow Him, even if they possess all on the earth and own the like of it with it, they would wish to offer them for their ransom; their reckoning will be terrible, and their abode will be hell - an evil resting!
13.19	Will he who sees what is sent down upon you by your God as the Truth, like a blind? Indeed, only the thoughtful shall have the wisdom.
13.20 	They fulfil their promise to Allah, and they will not break their words and promises.
13.21	And those who preserve which Allah has commanded to keep up. And they will fear their God and will be afraid of the severe reckoning.
13.22	And they will forbear for their God's pleasure and will stand firm for Him; and, they will give from what We have provided them, secretly and openly, and will avert evil with the good; theirs is the sequel of the goodly home.
13.23	In the eternal paradises - them, their fathers, their spouses and their generations - those who lived to their God's satisfaction shall enter it. And the angels will enter unto them from every gate.
13.24	"May you have Peace for your forbearance - excellent indeed is your final home."
13.25	And woe to those who break their word after the covenant with Allah, create divisions while Allah commands the joining, and who cause corruption on the land - evil is their abode.
13.26	Allah expands the provisions to whom He will, and also in just measures. Yet they rejoice only in this life - but the worldly life is low to the final eternal home.
13.27	And the rejecters say, "Should it not be that a Sign from his God sent down upon him?" Say, "Surely Allah leaves astray whom He will, and He guides who turn to Him." 
13.28	They are those who believed, and their hearts gain peace when they remember Allah; know that Allah's remembrance makes hearts remain in peace."
13.29	Those who believe and do good, to them are blessings and a beautiful abode.
13.30	Thus did We send you to a people. And people indeed, have gone by before them - to clarify what We inspired in you; but they reject the Bountiful Himself. Say, "He is my God; there is no God but He; I rely on Him, and unto Him is the return."
13.31	Surely, the Quran - through with it the mountains are moved, or the earth is rent asunder or the dead, made to speak - yet, all affairs rest with Allah. So do the believers not know that had Allah willed, He would have guided all humanity? Misfortunes hover over the rejecters for what they do, or it will settle close by their abodes, and Allah's promise will come to pass. Allah, indeed, will not fail in promise. 
13.32	And indeed before you, the messengers were mocked at, and I gave respite to the rejecters, and then I seized them. Therefore, how was My punishment?
13.33	Is it not He who is watchful of everything each one is earning? Yet, they ascribe partners to Allah. Say, "Name them! Or do you inform Him what He does not know on the earth? Or they are mere words?" Nay, but decked out fair to the disbelievers is their devising; they are barred from the Straight Path. who so Allah leaves astray, and none shall bring Him to the Path.
13.34	To them is chastisement in this world, and the chastisement in the Hereafter is even harsher - there is none to save them from Allah.
13.35	Those who fear Allah, the nature of the promised Paradise is - beneath it, the rivers would flow; its provisions and shadows are eternal; it is the end-home for those who fear; and, the end of the unbelievers is fire.
13.36	And to whom We have given the Book rejoice at what is sent down upon you. Still, a party of the people reject portions of it. Say, "I am but commanded to seek only from Allah and associate not anything to Him; I only call unto Him; and, to Him is My return."
13.37	Such, in Arabic - We have revealed with clear explanation. So, after the wisdom you have got, if you follow their desires, you will find neither a protector nor a helper from Allah.
13.38	And verily, We had sent messengers before you, and We gave them wives and descendants. And, not a messenger reveals a Sign from Allah but by His leave, for each period is a witness.
13.39	Allah effaces what He wills, and establishes; and, with Him is the source of ordinance.(418)
13.40	And whether We make you see some of Our promises to them or We call you to Us - upon you is deliverance, and Ours, the reckoning.
13.41	Do they not see that We are shortening the earth by its  wealth? And Allah is the judge, and no one changes His decree. And He is swift at reckoning.
13.42	And those before them too were devising; yet, all the plannings are with Allah, and He knows what each one earns; and, the disbelievers would soon know who deserves the best abode. 
13.43	And the disbelievers say, "You are not a messenger." Say, "Allah suffices me as a witness between you and me, and those who know the Book."

Chapter 14
Ibrahim

14.1	ALR - The wisdom, We revealed to you that you might bring the people from darkness to light by the leave of their God. Unto the path of the Mighty, Praised One.(419) 
14.2	Allah - to Him belongs all that is in the skies and the earth, but those who deny, suffer a woefully severe punishment.
14.3	They love the worldly life more than the life ultimate, and they prevent from the path of Allah, wishing to make it crooked; they are in far away error.
14.4	And We sent not a messenger to his people but who spoke their language to be well informed. Allah sends astray whom He wills and guides whom He wills. He is Mighty, Wise.
14.5	Surely We sent Musa with Our Signs saying, "Bring your people from the darkness to the light, and remind them of the days of Allah." Indeed, in it are the Signs for the patient, grateful.
14.6	And Musa said to his people, "Remember the Mercy of Allah upon you when He saved you from the people of Firaun. They oppressed you cruelly, killed your sons, and let the females to their endurance; therein was a great trial from your God."
14.7	And when your God said, "If you show thanks, I will surely increase you, but if you turn away, My punishment is indeed terrible."
14.8	And Musa said, "Even when you and all on earth come together in evil - surely Allah is Absolute, Glorified."
14.9	Has not the history of the people of Nuh, Aad and Samud before you, and that of the people who followed them come to you? None knows about them except Allah; and, their messengers brought them clear proofs, but they took their hands to their mouths and said, "We certainly deny that which you are sent with, and we are in serious doubt concerning to what you call us."(420)
14.10	Their messengers said, "Do you doubt Allah who created the skies and the earth? He calls you to salvation, giving you a reprieve for a stated time." They said, "You are not but a human, like us - and, do you wish to prevent us from what our forefathers were worshipping? If so, bring us clear Signs."
14.11	Their messengers who came to them said, "We are, but humans like you, and Allah showers His Grace upon whom He will of His slaves - and, we are not to bring any Sign unto you except by the leave of Allah. And whoever believes, may he trust Allah alone."
14.12	And what is with us that we do not rely on Allah? Indeed, He guided us in our affairs; we will surely endure your oppression. Let the trusting trust in Allah.
14.13	And the rejecters said to their messengers: Surely we would throw you out of our land, or you should return to our ways. And remember when their God said, " Verily, We will destroy the evildoers."
14.14	"Certainly We will make you inherit this land after them; this, for those who fear before Me, and for those who fear My warning."
14.15	So they turned to Allah, and every froward tyrant met his disaster.
14.16	After him is the hell - and he will be given oozing pus for drinking.
14.17	He will swallow it in sips, yet it will not go past his throat with ease, and death will come to him from all sides, but he is not to die; and, still beyond him is even evil punishment.
14.18	The parable of those who deny their God: their deeds are like ashes; on a day of a storm, the fury of the wind has swept away the ashes; and they will not have a hold on whatever they had earned - that is the far-error.
14.19	Have you not seen that Allah had created the heavens and the earth in truth? If He wills, He will cast you away and bring up a new creation.
14.20	And it is not a matter for Allah.
14.21	And all will stand before Allah; those who were weak would say to the arrogant ones, "Verily, we were your followers; now can you avert aught from Allah's punishment?" They will say, "If Allah guides us, we will show it to you; whether we cry or keep quiet, it is the same for us; we have no other go." 
14.22	And when the decree comes, Shaitan will say, "Surely Allah had given you a true promise - I too gave you the promise, but I wronged you. I called you, and you accepted my call, but for this, I haven't had any authority over you; therefore, do not curse me but curse yourself. I am not your helper, neither are you, my helper. I disown you, associating me with Allah before - surely, the wicked will suffer a severe punishment."
14.23	And whoever believes and does good will be given paradises, beneath which the rivers flow, and by their God's leave they will abide therein - their reward therein is "Peace be upon you."
14.24	Beheld not thee, how Allah coins a similitude? A goodly saying is a goodly tree; its roots are set firm, its branches reaching into heaven. 
14.25	The tree gives its fruits all the time by the leave of God. Allah gives such examples so that man reminisces.(421)
14.26	And the example of evil words is an evil tree pulled out from the earth's surface, and it has no lasting.
14.27	Whoever believes, Allah makes them firm both in this world and at the end with a firm word, and Allah sends the wrongdoers astray. And Allah does what He wills.
14.28	Have you not seen those who changed Allah's Blessings by disbelief and led their people to dwell in the abode of perdition?
14.29	Burning hell - a wretched place to dwell.
14.30	And they associate to Him to lead astray from the path of Allah. Say, "Enjoy a little; then surely your abode is hell."
14.31	Say to My believing bondsmen, "Surrender to your God before a day arrives wherein there will be no bargaining, nor friendliness, and give out of what We have provided them, secretly and openly."
14.32	Allah is He, who created the heavens and the earth; then He brought down the rain from the sky wherewith He produced varieties of fruits as your food, and by His leave He caused the ships to run in the sea under your control; and, He gave you control over the rivers.
14.33	It is He who subjected you, the sun and the moon, that they moved in their orbits in perfect order. And He subjected to you the night and the day.
14.34	And He gave you everything from what you have heard of Him, and you will run out of count if you reckon His blessings on you; verily, man is transgressing, thankless.
14.35	And when Ibrahim said: "My God, make this town free from fear, protect my people and me, from worshipping the idols."
14.36	"God, surely these have caused many into the path of error; so whoever follows me, he is of me and whoever turns away from me - surely You are Most Forgiving, Merciful."
14.37	"Our God, surely I have settled my following in no man's valley, by Your sacred house - Our God, to establish them in Your way; so, make the hearts of a party of the people to lean on to them and provide them of the fruits that they might be thankful."
14.38	"Our God, surely You are the Knower of our secrets and openness; and, nothing is hidden to Allah what is in the sky and the earth."
14.39	All glory be to Allah; He gave me Ismail and Ishaq in my old age; surely, my God grants the call.
14.40	"God, make me and my following as those who establish Your Way; our God, accept my call!"
14.41	"Our God, forgive me and my parents and the believers on the Day of Reckoning."
14.42	And think not that Allah is unmindful of what the unjust do; it is delayed for them only for the day their eyes will be still and stare.
14.43	They will be running with their heads raised, their eyes will not return to them, and their souls will be void.
14.44	So admonish the people of the day before such punishment comes upon them. Then the transgressors would say: "Our God, give us a respite; we will accept your call, and we shall follow the messengers." "What! weren't you wont to swear, your end will not come?"(422)
14.45	And you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves, and We did show to you how We dealt with them. And We showed you the examples.
14.46	They were consistently plotting which plots shall even efface the mountains, yet their plottings are with Allah.
14.47	So never think Allah will fail in His promise to His messengers; surely Allah is Mighty, Avenging.
14.48	And on the day when this earth is changed to a different land, and when the skies are changed, they will come forth before Allah, the One, Supreme Command.
14.49	And on that day, you will find all the guilty chained together.
14.50	And their clothing would be of molten tar; and, the fire would cover their faces.
14.51 	So, Allah shall justly recompense for what they used to earn; verily, Allah is swift in reckoning.
14.52	That they are warned with this and that they know, "God is One!" That is the proclamation to humanity so that the knowledge would know.

Chapter 15
The Mountain Rock

15.1	ALR - These are the Signs of the Book and a manifest Quran.(423)
15.2	The rejecters would wish that they should have surrendered to their God.
15.3	Leave them to eat and enjoy; their indulgence has diverted them, but soon they will know.
15.4	And never did We destroy a town before the decree was made known.
15.5	No people can outstrip their term, nor can they lag.
15.6	And they say, "O you upon whom the revelation is sent; you are surely a madman".
15.7	"If you are truthful, should you not have brought us, angels, with you?"
15.8	We do not send down the angels but with Truth; then they will not be respited.
15.9	Surely We sent down the manifest wisdom, and indeed, We are its guardian.(424)
15.10	And indeed, We sent many before you to various communities.
15.11	But never a messenger came to them, but they did mock him.
15.12	Thus do We make it enter into the hearts of the criminals.
15.13	They will not believe in this, and that has been the way of those before them.
15.14	Even if We open up a gate to them from the heavens and they kept climbing up.(425)
15.15	They would indeed say: "Our eyes have been dazzled; nay, we are folk bewitched."
15.16	And We set constellations in space and made it beauteous for the beholders. 
15.17	And We protected them from every evil shaitan, cursed.(426)
15.18	Except he who hears by stealth- a blazing flare will pursue him.(427)
15.19	And We expanded the earth and cherished it with mountains; and we caused every produce in it, each with a measure.(428)
15.20	And in it, We have made every provision for you and to whom you will not provide.(429)
15.21	And not the treasures of every provision is but with us, and We send it not down but with a measure known.(430)
15.22	And We send the breeze of laden clouds; then We cause the rain to descend from the heavens wherewith We provide you to drink, and you are not to store it.
15.23	And indeed it is We who give life and cause death, and We are the Inheritor.
15.24	And We indeed know who the first among you are, and We surely know who lag.
15.25	And surely your God will gather them. He indeed is Wise, The Knowing.
15.26	And We indeed created man from sounding black clay, moulded.
15.27	And before, We created Jinn from the blaze of fire.
15.28	And when your God said to the angels, "Indeed I am going to create human beings from sounding black clay."
15.29	"So when I perfect him and elevate him with My Ruh, surrender to him!"(431)
15.30	So, all the angels surrendered.
15.31	Except Iblis- he stayed away from surrendering.
15.32	He said, "O Iblis, why haven't you joined with those who surrendered?"
15.33	He said, "I am not to surrender to the human who You created from the sounding black clay."
15.34	Said He, "Then get out of this; indeed you are accursed!"
15.35	"Upon you shall rest the curse till the Day of Reckoning."
15.36	Iblis said, "O my God, grant me respite till the day of  resurrection."(432)
15.37	Said He, "Indeed, you are of the respited ones."
15.38	"Until the Hour determined, comes."
15.39	"My God, since you left me astray, I will entice them all, making this earth glamorous."
15.40	"Except Your pure-hearted servants among them."
15.41	Said He, "This path is the straight path to Me."
15.42	"Surely you have no authority over My servants, except who followed you in error."
15.43	And, "Surely, hell is the promised place for them all."
15.44	"It has seven gates; each gate is meant for a people, set for it."
15.45	Surely, God-fearing will be in the paradises and fountains.
15.46	"Enter in it fearlessly, peaceful."
15.47	"And We will remove animosities from their breasts. They will be seated on the thrones facing one another as brethren."
15.48	Fatigue will not touch them in it, and they will not be expelled from there.
15.49	Say to My servants: "I am indeed the most Forgiving, Loving.
15.50	"And indeed, My punishment will be severely painful."
15.51	And narrate to them about the guests of Ibrahim.
15.52	When they came to him and said, "Peace!" He said, "We fear you!"
15.53	They said, "Fear not; we give glad tidings about a child, endowed with wisdom."
15.54	He said, "Do you give me glad tidings at this old age? Of what then is your good news?"
15.55	They said, "Verily, we gave you the good news; so, do not despair."
15.56	He said, "Who will despair of the Mercy of His God, save those who are astray?"(433)
15.57	He said, "And what is your task O, ye Messengers?"
15.58	They said, "We are sent to a people, transgressing."
15.59	"Except the followers of Lut, indeed We will save them all."
15.60	"Except his wife; We have decreed that she certainly stayed back."
15.61	And when the messengers came to the folk of Lut,
15.62	He said, "You seem to be strangers!"
15.63	They said, "Nay, we have brought to you that which they doubt."
15.64	And, "We have brought you the truth, and we indeed are truthful."
15.65	"So, set forth, in a watch of the night with your folk, and follow behind them; none of you shall even turn to see, and continue on to wither you are commanded."
15.66	And We revealed to him this decree: they are to be uprooted in the early morning.
15.67	And the people of the city came rejoicing;
15.68	He said, "Surely these are my guests; so put me not to shame."
15.69	And, "Fear Allah; disgrace me not."
15.70	They said, "Did we not forbid you from the world?"
15.71 	He said, "Here are my daughters if you would be doing!" 
15.72	"By your life! surely they are blindly wandering in their intoxication."
15.73 	So thunder seized them at sunrise.
15.74	And We turned it uppermost nethermost, and We rained on it stones of baked clay.
15.75	Surely in it are manifest signs for those who ponder.
15.76 	And surely, it is right on the highway. 
15.77	Behold! Therein is the Sign for the believers.
15.78	And those who lived in the flourishing gardens were transgressing ones.
15.79	So we avenged them; both are on the highways, open to see.
15.80	And the people of the 'mountain rocks' too were belying their prophets.
15.81	And We gave them Our Signs, but they were neglecting them.
15.82	And out of the mountains they hewed out edifices, well secured.
15.83	Yet they were seized by the blast in the early morning.
15.84	And all that they were wont to count as gain, availed them nothing.
15.85	And We have not created the heavens and the earth, and in between but in truth. And, the Hour is bound to arrive; so, forgive them with gracious forgiveness.
15.86	Your God indeed is All-Creator, All-Knowing.
15.87	And We have certainly given you the pondering of the Seven and the Mighty Quran.
15.88	Stretch not your eyes at We have allowed on certain classes of them, nor grieve over them; yet, have mercy upon the believers.
15.89	Say, "Indeed I am a plain warner."
15.90	Just as We sent down upon the splitters,
15.91	Upon the splitters of this Quran too.
15.92	So, by your God, surely We will question them all.
15.93	About what they used to do.
15.94	So, declare openly what you are commanded, and ignore the idolators.
15.95	Indeed, We suffice you against the mockers.
15.96	They set up God besides Allah, but soon they will come to know.
15.97	And indeed, We know your heart is straitened at what they say.
15.98	So exalt your God's praise and be of those who surrendered.
15.99	And look up to your God, until, comes to you the certainty.

Chapter 16
The Bees

16.1	Allah's command has come. So hasten not about it. He is Most Pure, Most High from all that they associate with Him.
16.2	He sends down the messengers from the angels with revelation upon whom He will of His servants saying, "Give the warning that there is no God but I, so, fear Me!"
16.3	He has created the heavens and the earth in truth; Most High is He, above that they associate.
16.4	He created man from a mere drop; yet, behold! He is an open enemy.
16.5	And He created the cattle for you whence is the warmth and much more benefits, and of which you eat.
16.6	And there is a beauty in them for you when you bring them in and as you take them out.
16.7	And they carry your loads to distant places- impossible for you to travel but with extreme difficulty. Indeed, your God is Merciful, Loving.
16.8	And the horses, mules and asses for you to ride and as an ornament; and, He creates what you know not.
16.9 	And with Allah is the way straight, and there are ways, wrong; and if He wills, indeed, He would guide you all aright.
16.10	He brings the rain from the sky wherefrom is your drink, and the grasslands on which you send your cattle to pasture.
16.11	In addition to that, He causes the crops and the olives and the date palms to grow for you. And grapevines and all kinds of fruits. Lo! Herein is indeed a sign for those who give thought.										
16.12	And it is He who made subservient to you, the night and the day - and the sun and moon. And by His command, the stars. Again herein indeed are the signs for those who ponder.
16.13	And whatever He has created on the earth is of diverse hues; this is a definite sign for those who reflect.
16.14	And to feed you of the sea, the tender meat, and to bring forth from it the ornaments to deck you with, it is He who subjected it to you. And you see the ship cleaving through it, to seek His bounties and to show thanks to Him, He made it subservient to you.
16.15	And He erected mountains firm on the earth lest it shakes with you, and to lead your ways, the rivers and the passages.	
16.16	And they find their paths by the signs; and, the stars.
16.17	Is He who Creates as that that does not create? Will you not think?
16.18	And if you count the bounties of Allah, you will run out of numbers; indeed, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
16.19	And Allah knows what you hide and what you reveal.
16.20	And unto whom they cry beside Allah created nought, but are themselves created.
16.21	Dead, not alive. And they know not when they will be raised.
16.22	Your God is One God! So whoever disbelieves in the hereafter, their breasts are denying, and they are haughty.
16.23	Doubt not! Allah knows what they hide and what they make manifest; indeed, He does not love the proud.
16.24	And when said to them, "What has your God sent down?" They say, "Stories of the ancients."
16.25	Let them bear their entire burden on the Hour and the burden of those whom they misled arrogantly. Know that evil is that they carry!
16.26	Those who were before them did plot, but Allah effaced their tower, and their ceilings toppled on them. The torment struck them from the directions they never perceived.
16.27	Then, on the Hour, He would disgrace them and say, "Where are My 'partners' concerning whom ye disputed?" And those who had wisdom would say, "Indeed, This Day, upon the rejecters, are the disgrace and the torment."
16.28	The angels would capture their souls while they wrong themselves, but they would submit and say, "We have not been doing any wrong at all." Nay, Allah indeed, is the Knower of what you used to do.
16.29	"So, enter the gates of hell and abide therein; what an evil abode for the proud!"
16.30	And when the pious were asked, "What did your God send down?" They said, "The Good!" Whoever does a beautiful deed, for them is a handsome reward in this world and will be much better in the end; whoever fears God, the most graceful indeed is the House."
16.31	They will enter the paradises eternal beneath which the rivers flow, and they will have there all they wished for; such is Allah's reward for the God-fearing.
16.32	Whose souls the angels take while they are goodly would say, "Peace be upon you! Enter the paradise for that you were doing."
16.33	Do they expect, but the angels shall come upon them, or your God's command descend upon them? So did those before them; Allah did not harm them, but they harmed themselves.
16.34	So their evil came upon them, and that which they mocked surrounded them.
16.35	And the idolators say, "If Allah had willed our ancestors or we would not have worshipped anything other than Him. And, but by His leave, we would not have forbidden anything." Thus did those before them; so is there anything upon the messengers except to reveal clearly?
16.36	And We indeed sent messengers to every community saying, "Call upon Allah alone, and turn away from shaitans." So, of them are whom Allah guided, and of them are who had been cast astray. And, go about the land and behold that had happened to those who belied.
16.37	However hard you wish that they took to the straight path, Allah will not guide whom He had left astray; there is no helper to them.
16.38	And they firmly swear by Allah, "Allah will not raise the dead!" Nay, the Word is firm, yet most men understand not.
16.39	To make plain to them about that which they disputed, and that the unbelievers would know they were the liars;-
16.40	It is Our Word: When We intend a thing, We say to it, "Be! and it is."
16.41	And whoever forsook their places of living after oppression for Allah's sake, indeed to them, We give a beautiful abode in this world; and if they knew, the reward in the hereafter would be much more graceful.
16.42	They are those who endure and put their trust in their God.
16.43	And those whom We sent with Our revelation before, are none but males; so if you do not know, seek from those who are thoughtful.
16.44	We sent down upon you the clear reminder, to make them ponder that which is blessed for humanity with clear Signs, and as Inspiration.
16.45	Are they without fear that Allah will not make the earth swallow them up for their evil plots or that the punishment will come upon them from nowhere?
16.46	Or that He will not seize them while on their travels? So you will in no way fail Him.
16.47	Or that He will not take them even as they were fearful of it? Your God indeed is Relenting, Merciful.
16.48	Beheld them not aught Allah had created? Their shadows bow to the right and the left, surrendering to Allah.
16.49	And all that is in the heavens and the earth, the creations and the angels bow surrendering to Allah- and they are not proud.
16.50	They fear their God above them, and they do what they are commanded.
16.51	And Allah says: Make not two Gods, He is One God; so, fear Me alone. 
16.52	Unto Him is what in the heavens and the earth are, and our obeisance shall ever be unto Him; and, do you fear that which are not Allah?
16.53	And whatever good you possess, it is from Allah, and when you suffer distress, unto Him, ye cry.
16.54	Then when He removes the distress from you, behold, a section of you set up partners to God.
16.55	To deny what We have given them - "enjoy then, soon you will know."
16.56	And they set aside a part of what We have given them to that they do not know; and by Allah, indeed, you will be questioned about the lies you invented.
16.57	And they assign daughters to Allah; Glory be to Him - and they desire for them
16.58	And when one of them receives the tidings of a female, his face becomes gloomy with anger.
16.59	He hides him from his people for the disgrace of a good tiding for him. Should he keep it with shame or bury it in the dust? How evil they decide!
16.60	Whoever disbelieves in the hereafter, the evil is of them, and Allah's is most High; and He is Mighty, Wise.
16.61	And if Allah were to punish men for their sins, He would not leave a single creature on earth; but, He reprieves them for a term determined - and when their time arrives they will neither prepone it nor will they postpone by a moment.
16.62	And they assign to Allah that which they do not wish for themselves, and their tongues lie that they will certainly receive good; fire awaits them, and no doubt they will be thrust into it.
16.63	By Allah, We have sent to the people before you, yet Shaitan made fair-seeming to them their deeds - so this day, he is their close ally and to them is a painful torment.
16.64	And not We revealed this Book to you except to clarify to them, things in which they dispute. That is the Guidance and a Mercy for those who believe.
16.65	And Allah brings rain from the sky giving therewith life to the earth after it is dead, and in it indeed are the Signs for those who have ears.
16.66	And indeed in the cattle are the Signs for you, and from their bellies between the dung and the blood, We bring forth milk pure, palatable for the drinkers.
16.67	And you make the fruit juices from the palms and the vines, and delicious food. Indeed, herein is a sign for people who ponder.
16.68	And your God gave inspiration to the Bee - "Make hives in the mountains, in the trees and the high ceilings."
16.69	Then absorb from all kinds of fruits and enter in by your God's easy way; comes forth out of their bellies, a drink of diverse hues, soothing to humankind; indeed, in this is a sign for those who ponder.
16.70	And it is Allah who created you, then causes you to die. And, there are the very old among you, living like not knowing at all, after possessing it. Indeed Allah is All-Knowing, All-Mighty.
16.71	And Allah has favoured some above some others in wealth. Those who are thus wealthy do not give to those who are close and righteous for them and make them equals therein with them. What! Do they refuse Allah's Blessings?
16.72	And Allah has created for you life-partners from among you, and from your partners, He gave you your descendants and grandchildren - and gives you a goodly provision; yet, do they then believe in the falsities, rejecting Allah's favours?
16.73	And besides Allah, they call upon those who possess not a thing for them in the heavens or the earth, powerless.
16.74   So give no examples for Allah, for indeed, Allah knows, and you know not.
16.75   Allah gives an example: A slave, having no power over whatever provision the other one possesses, and the other, to whom We have given goodly provisions from Us, of which he spends secretly and openly. Will they both be equal? All Praise be to Allah, yet most know not.
16.76   And Allah sets forth a parable of two men: one of them is dumb, having no authority over anything, and he is a burden to his master. He brings no good wherever he is sent. Is he equal to him who bids justice and is on a straight path?

16.77   And to Allah belongs the secrets of the heavens and earth(434).  So, the Hour is not but like the blinking of the eyes or even nearer. Indeed, Allah is Powerful over all things.

16.78	And Allah brings you forth from your mothers' wombs when aught you know, and then He gave you the hearing, the sight and the heart so that you may be thankful.
16.79	Behold not they, the birds held in the sky by His command? None but Allah has them. Assuredly, in it are the signs for those who believe.
16.80	And, Allah has made your houses your peaceful abode and made light your camping from the hides of livestock while on your journey and encampment, and He gave you their wool, fur and hairs as apparels and comfort for a period. 
16.81	And, Allah gave you shades from His creations, shelters in the mountains, and clothing to protect you from the heat; and, made for your shields to save you from your violence. Thus He completed His favour on you that you may surrender.(435)
16.82	But if they turn away, what is upon you is a plain conveyance.
	Follow the Wisdom of God, not the knowledge in vogue.
16.83	They know well the benevolence of Allah, but they reject it. And, most of them are people rejecting.
16.84	And on the day when We raise a witness from each community, the rejecters will not be allowed, nor will they be given a chance.
16.85	And when the wicked ones see the punishment, it will not be lessened for them, nor will they be reprieved.
16.86	And when those who set up associates to God see those that they associated, would say, "Our God, these are whom we associated; we were calling upon these besides you. But they would shoot back at them and say, "Surely you are liars!"
16.87	And on that day, they will offer surrender to God, and whatever they falsely invented would disappear from them.
16.88	Whoever rejects and causes hindrance in the path of Allah - for their mischievous deeds; We would increase on them the torment upon the torment.
16.89	And on that day, We will raise a witness from their community and bring you as a witness against them. We have sent down to you this Book which clarifies everything. And, a Guidance, and a Mercy, and a glad tiding to those who seek Peace. 
16.90	Verily, Allah enjoins us towards justice and good deeds, giving to nearer ones; and, forbids lewdness, abomination and wickedness; and He gives you glad tidings perchance ye may give thought.
16.91	And fulfil your swearing, in the Name of Allah and break not your promises confirmed, after making Allah a witness over you. And Allah is Watcher over all that ye do. 
16.92	And be not like she who shredded her firmly twisted spun to fibres; and, make not your oaths to deceive between you because a party is more numerous than another party. For Allah only tries you thereby. And indeed, He will inform you clearly on the Hour, that whereon you were at variance.
16.93	And had Allah willed He would have made you a single nation, yet He leaves astray whom He wills and guides whom He wills. And you will indeed be questioned concerning what you have done.
16.94	And make not your oaths a deceit between you, lest you will lose your foothold; and, you will taste the evil for your obstructing the path of Allah; yours will be a severe torment.
16.95	And do not exchange the covenant of Allah for meanness; indeed, what is with Allah for you is the best, if ye did but know.
16.96	All that you possess will vanish, but what is with Allah, will abide; and whoever endures, We will indeed give them a beautiful reward for the best they did.
16.97	Believing male or female, whoever is righteous, We shall assuredly give them a goodly life, and We will provide them with a grand reward for the best they used to do.
16.98	And when you recite Quran, seek refuge in Allah from the accursed shaitan.
16.99	Indeed, he has no power over those who believe and put their trust in God.
16.100	His power is only over those who make him an ally and ascribe partners to Him. 
16.101	When We adapt the Sign of a verse explicitly to another verse, they say, "Indeed, you are an inventor!" And Allah knows what He reveals, yet most of them know not.(436)
16.102	Say: the angel pure, brought it down from your God in truth, to strengthen the believers, and a guide, and a glad tiding to those who wish peace.
16.103	And verily, We know them saying, "Undoubtedly, it is a man who teaches him!" But his tongue is foreign, referring to whom they say, while this being in clear Arabic.
16.104	Surely, Allah will not guide him who would not believe in Allah's Signs, and for them is a painful torment.
16.105	Those who forge are only those who would not believe in Allah's Signs, and they are the forgers!
16.106	Whoever rejects Allah after believing in Him save who is forced to that and whose heart is content in faith; but, whosoever heart has increased in rejection, upon them is the wrath of Allah, and to them is a painful torment.
16.107	For, indeed they love this world greater than the hereafter; and, Allah will certainly not guide the disbelieving people.
16.108	Allah has sealed their hearts, their hearing and their sight; and, such are they who were negligent.
16.109	Indeed, they shall be the losers in the hereafter.
16.110	Then Allah indeed, is with those who after their trial, left their homes, fighting a just war, and who endured; certainly, thereafter your God is All-Forgiving, All-Merciful.
16.111	On the day when each soul would contend, will be fully recompensed for what they did; and they will not be wronged.
16.112	And Allah cites parable of a nation: the dwellers in it were peaceful and without fear; its provisions came-in, in abundance from every place; but they were ingrate to Allah's bounties and were unjust in their deeds; so, Allah made them wear the garment of hunger and fear that they earned.
16.113	And indeed, to them came a messenger from among them; but they belied him; so, distress seized them while they were unjust.
16.114	So, eat of the pure and lawful provisions; and be grateful to Allah's favour if you worship Him.
16.115	What He has forbidden to you is that which was dead, blood, and swine flesh, and upon which the invocation besides Allah is made - but if anyone is forced while he has no intention of rebelling or committing sin, then Allah indeed is Forgiving, Merciful.
16.116	And say not like what your tongues lie such as, 'this is lawful, and this is forbidden'; indeed, who so forge against Allah, will not succeed. 
16.117	A very mean pleasure, and for them is chastisement severe.
16.118	And We have forbidden to the Jews that We had clarified to you before; We wronged them not, but they wronged themselves.
16.119	Then, indeed your God - to who so repents and amends after wrongdoing in ignorance- then certainly, your God is Returning, Merciful.
16.120	Verily Ibrahim was a guide, abiding and devoted to Allah; and, he was not of the idolators.
16.121	Grateful for His grace; He has chosen him and guided him to the straight path.
16.122	And We gave him in this world beauteous things and indeed, in the hereafter he will be among the righteous.
16.123	Then We inspired you to follow 'the righteousness of Ibrahim, in truth,' and he was not of the idolators.
16.124	The 'forbidden day' was ordained only upon those at variance thereon. And indeed, your God will judge between them on the day of reckoning as to their conflict.
16.125	Call to your God's path with wisdom and by beautiful explanation, and discuss with them in the best way. Indeed, your God- He knows well who strayed from His way, and He knows who is guided.
16.126	And if you punish, punish them with the like of that wherewith you were harmed; but, if you are patient, indeed, it is better for the patient.
16.127	And be patient. Yet, your patience is not but by the help of Allah - grieve not over them nor be straitened for that they plot.
16.128	Allah is with those who fear Him and those who do good deeds.



Chapter 17
The Descendants of Israel

17.1	The Most Pure is He who took His servant to the destination of the established truth, on a night while he was absorbed in a divine state of inspiration; and, We have blessed it with abounds all about - thus to show Our Signs to him; indeed, He is All Hearing, Seeing.(437)
17.2	And We gave Musa, the Book, and made it as the Guidance to the descendants of Israel: Make not protectors besides Me. (438)
17.3	The descendants of those whom We have borne aboard the ship with Nuh! Verily he was a grateful servant.(439)
17.4	And in the Book, to the descendants of Israel We have said, "Surely twice will you cause corruption in the land, and in arrogance and transgression, shall exceed." 
17.5	So when the first of  the two promises came, We caused Our servants of mighty power descend on you, and they had entered the privacies of your houses - and it was a promise fulfilled.(440)
17.6	Then We switched the tide of victory on you over them; and, We reinforced you with wealth and children, and made you a formidable strength.
17.7	If you do good, you do good unto you, and if you do evil, it is for you. And, to cloud your faces with gloom as the second promise comes to pass, shall they enter the houses to destroy totally whatever they come-on  as had happened when they entered in the first instance;-
17.8	It may be that your God shows mercy on you; and, if you return, We return too, and for the disbelievers, We have made hell as a prison.
17.9	Indeed, this Quran guides them to the most righteous and the glad tidings - a great reward to the believing good-doers.
17.10	And whoever disbelieves the hereafter, for them. We have prepared a chastising punishment.
17.11	And man prays for evil as he prays for his good; lo, man is ever hasty.
17.12	And We made the night and day two Signs; then we made the Sign of darkness clear and made bright the Sign of light that you might seek your God's grace - to determine the periods and to observe, and that We have clearly explained all affairs.
17.13	And We have hung each man's deed on his neck, and We will reveal the witnesses on the Day of Reckoning which he will receive openly.
17.14	"Read thy book! Thy soul suffices this day as a reckoner against thee."
17.15	Whoever takes to the guidance, he guides himself for his good; and, whoever takes to the evil path, he casts evil upon himself; no bearer of burden will bear the burden of another, and We will not punish until a messenger is sent.
17.16	And if We wish to destroy a town, We will charge its fiery people - and they will exceed high; then upon the town comes true, the word - and, We annihilate it.
17.17	How many a nation have We destroyed since Nuh! And your God suffices as the Knower of the evils and as a Watcher over His bondmen.
17.18	Whoever desires this world's life; We will hasten upon whom We will that We fix; then We assign to him, the hell; they will enter it condemned, cursed. 
17.19	And We accept the just efforts of the believing who are wishful of the hereafter. 
17.20	To them, and the others are, from your God's grace; and, your God's grace is not denied at all.
17.21	Behold, how We have raised in degrees some over the others! Yet, the rank in the hereafter is much greater and more glorious.
17.22	Take not a god besides Allah; you will become of the condemned and cast away.
17.23	And your God has decreed, 'call not except Him, and kindness to parents'; and, utter not "Ugh!" in aversion towards them when one or both of them have indeed become aged with you; nor repulse them; and speak to them words, compassionate.
17.24	And mercifully lower upon them both, the wings of compassion. And say, "My God, show Mercy upon them both as they brought me up when I was a child."
17.25	Your God knows well what you have in your hearts; if you are good-hearted, indeed to those who often seek forgiveness, He is Most Forgiving.
17.26	And give privilege to them, who are near relation, and to those who are needy and strive in the straight path; but expend not for pride.
17.27	Those who spend for pride, are surely shaitan's brethren; and shaitan is ever ungrateful to his God. 
17.28	But if you are to ignore them while you await, seeking the mercy of Allah, speak only kind words to them. 
17.29	And fold not tight your hands around your neck; and spread not out wide your hands; if you do you will become disrespected and aggrieved.
17.30	Surely your God bestows in ampleness to who He wishes; and in a measure. Surely He Knows well His servants, Sees well.
17.31	And kill not your children fearing poverty; it is We who provide for them and for you; to kill them indeed is a grave sin.
17.32	And do not get near to adultery; it is indeed sinful to mind and a path evil to the core.
17.33	And when Allah has forbidden, kill not any one but for just reason; and if someone has been killed unjustly, verily We have given authority to his heir; but exceed not in killing. Verily, he is favoured.
17.34	And do not approach the properties of the orphan until he reaches maturity, without just reasons; and fulfil your promises; surely the promises will be questioned.
17.35	And when you measure, measure fully; and measure wholeheartedly - this is good and in the end will be most beautiful.
17.36	And pursue not that of which you have no knowledge - surely the hearing, and the sight and the heart - each will be questioned.
17.37	And walk not on the earth with egotism; surely you cannot rend the earth nor can you reach the mountainous heights.
17.38	The evil of all these is hateful to your God.
17.39	And all these are the wisdom of your God's inspiration upon you; so make not a god other than Allah; you will be cast into hell, censured and banished.
17.40	Has your God given you males while He took females of the angels? Abominable indeed, are your words!
17.41	And certainly in this Quran We have given clear explanations for them to understand; yet, it increased not in them but aversion.
17.42	Say: if there were other deities with Him, as they say, surely they would have sought to the owner of the Throne, a way.
17.43	He is Most Pure; and He is Most High above what they forge against Him.
17.44	Those in the seven heavens and in the earth glorify His praise; and there is not a thing that does not glorify His Purity; yet you will not know their glorifying. Verily He is Forbearing, Forgiving.
17.45	And if you recite the Quran, We draw a veil invisible(441) between you and those who disbelieve in the life to come.
17.46	And We have put coverings upon their hearts so that they shall not understand it; and cause deafness in their ears; and when you mention your God alone in Quran, they turn their backs in aversion.
17.47	We know well their intention when they hear you speak, and that they say to themselves, their mischiefs in their private conversation that 'you only follow a man bewitched'.
17.48	See(442) what similes they strike for you! so they had gone astray; and they will not be able for the straight path.
17.49	And they say, "Will we be really raised up as a new creation after we are bones and dust?"
17.50	Say: "Become rock or iron!"
17.51	"Or what you have in your hearts as the biggest creation; they will say, 'who shall raise us?' say, "It is Him, who created you in the first place." Then they slant their heads to you and say, "When is it?" Say, "Perhaps very soon!"
17.52	On the day of resurrection, ye will glorify His Praises and ye will think ye tarried but a short while.
17.53	And say to my servants they say only livelier(443) things; certainly shaitan will provoke strife between them; indeed shaitan is a manifest foe to man.
17.54	Your God best knows you; if He so will, He would show you mercy, or if He so will, He would punish you. And We have not sent you to be a guardian(444) over them.
17.55	And your God is well knowing of whoever is in the heavens and in the earth; and verily We had placed some prophets in degrees higher over some others. And We gave 'Zabur' to Dawood.
17.56	Say: "try calling those whom you think other than Him; they have no powers to relieve you from distress or turn them away. 
17.57	Those whom they call- them, even the nearest are keeping up doing good things for Allah, expecting His Mercy and fearing His punishment. Surely the punishment of your God is ever to be feared.
17.58	And it is not that We destroy not any town or torment them with a severe punishment, before the Final Hour. It is in the Book, inscribed.
17.59	And naught prevented Us from sending the Signs except the elders who belied them. And We gave the people of Samud, a she-camel as a visible sign; but they did her wrong. And We shall not send Signs but as warning signals.
17.60	And when We said: your God certainly encompasses men and We made not the vision We showed you and the cursed timber mentioned in Quran except as a trial unto the human kind; and We warn them. But this aggravated them not except in their aggression, great.
17.61	And when We said to the angels, "Obey Adam!", except Iblis, obeyed. He said, "Do I have to obey him who You have created from clay?"
17.62	Said he, "Did You see him whom You have dignified over me? If you defer my end till the end I will certainly lead astray his descendants, except a few."
17.63	Said He, "Get away! If there are among them who would follow you - surely hell will be your recompense, an ample recompense."
17.64	"And beguile them whom you can by your noise; and assault them with your steed-warriors and soldiers; and become companions in their wealth and in their children; and give them promises. Lo! shaitan promises them nothing but deceit."  
17.65	Indeed you have no power at all against my servants; and your God suffices as Protector.
17.66	Your God sails the ship on the sea that you may seek His bounties; surely He is Most Compassionate towards you.
17.67	And in the sea when a calamity touches you, all those you were calling upon besides Him will vanish; but when He saves and brings you to the shore, you turn away - and man is ever ingrate.
17.68	Then are you fearless that He will not bury you in a part of the land, or He will not rain stones upon you? Then you will not find a protector.
17.69	Or, are you fearless that you shall not be taken back to the sea and that He sends fierce tempest on you and drowns you for your rejection? Then, for you against Us, you will not find a helper.
17.70	And We certainly honoured the descendants of Adam; and We carried them in the land and in the sea; and gave them from the good provisions and exalted them above all My creations.
17.71	The Day when We call forth every people with their leaders - to whoever his record was given in his right hand, they will read their records; and they will not be dealt with a whit unjustly.
17.72	And whoso is blind here, then he shall be blind in the hereafter and is far astray from the right path.
17.73	And they tried hard to turn you away from what We inspired to you, that you might forge against Us another; and then they would have surely taken you as a friend.
17.74	And had We not strengthened you, you would have somewhat inclined to them.
17.75	Then, We would have made you taste double in the life and double in the death; then you will not find for you a helper against Us.(445)
17.76	And indeed they were near to startling you that you should emigrate; lo! they shall not survive but for a while after you.
17.77	Surely, this has been the practise concerning Our messengers We had sent before you; and in Our way, you shall not see a change.(446)
17.78	Stand firm in the remembrance of Allah from the setting of the sun to the darkness of the night and The Quran, at waking up - surely, the awakening is witness to Quran.(447)
17.79	And glorify God for the Wish you possess, in part of night. May your God raise you to the Sanctum, glorified.
17.80	And say, "My God, make me enter with dignity and exit with dignity; and help me by the grant of Your Wisdom."
17.81	And say, "The Truth has come; and the falsehood has perished. Surely the falsehood shall perish."
17.82	And We have revealed in Quran that which is goodly availing for the believers. But to the rejecters, it has not increased but loss.
17.83	And when We bless man with pleasantness, he turns away and distances himself; and when an adversity befalls him, he despairs.
17.84	Say: each follows his way; and only your God knows who is righteous.
17.85	And they ask you concerning Ruh. Say the Ruh is by the command of my God; and not but a portion of the wisdom is bestowed upon you. 
17.86	And if We wish We would surely remove the inspiration We have revealed to you; then you will not find an advocate against Us.
17.87	But for the Mercy of your God; surely His Mercy is immense upon you.
17.88	Say, "It is impossible to bring the like of this Quran even if mankind and the jinn gathered together, and some helping some other, to bring the like of it."
17.89	Surely in this Quran, We have explained to man the examples from everything; yet most men refuse all but disbelief.
17.90	And they say, "We are not to believe you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us.
17.91 	"Or you shall possess a garden of date-palms and grapes and make rivers gush through them all.
17.92	"Or until you break the skies into pieces and you cause it to fall on us; or you bring Allah and the angels directly before us.
17.93	"Or you have a mansion of gold; or you shall climb up the sky and unless you bring for us a book to read, we shall not believe even your climbing up." Say, "Most Pure is my God; am I anything but a man, - a messenger?"
17.94	And when the Guidance came to mankind, nothing made them disbelieve except that they said, 'Is it a man that Allah has sent as messenger?'
17.95	Say, "If angels themselves were living peacefully on the earth, surely We would have sent down an angel as a messenger, from the sky."
17.96	Say, "Allah suffices as a witness between you and me; surely He is ever a Seer, Knower of His slaves."
17.97	And whoever Allah conducts, he is guided; and whoever He leaves astray, you will not find a helper for them except Him; and We will gather them on the last day, dragging them upon their faces as blind, deaf and dumb; their shelter is hell; whenever it abates We increase the flame for them.
17.98	Their recompense is that for what they said belying Our Signs: 'wilt we be raised again after we are reduced to bones and dust, as a new creation?'
17.99	Do they not understand Allah is surely Able to create them anew when He could create the heavens and the earth? And He has fixed for them a period determined about which there is no doubt; yet, the wrong doers refuse anything save disbelief.
17.100	Say, "Even if you possess the abundance from my God, you will restrict them lest it would be spent - and man is ever stingy.
17.101	And indeed, We gave Musa nine clear Signs - and enquire the descendants of Israel when he came to them: then Firaun said to him, "Musa! I certainly deem thee, one bewitched."
17.102	He said, "You know well these were not sent down except by God, who created the heavens and the earth as Signs. Firaun! certainly I feel you are bound to be destroyed!"
17.103	So he decided to drive them away from the land; but We drowned him and all those who were with him.
17.104	And We said after him, to the descendants of Israel, "Dwell in that nation! And when the promise of the Hour arrives We will gather you a rabble."(448)
17.105	And We sent it down with the Truth and with the Truth has it descended; and We have not sent you but as a harbinger of Truth and as a warner.
17.106	And in order that you shall reveal this Quran gradually to the people, We divided it; and We sent it down progressively.
17.107	Say: "Believe it or reject it; indeed if it is recited to them who were endowed with wisdom before, will fall on their faces in complete surrender."
17.108	And they will say, "Exalted is our God and indeed the promise of our God is fulfilled!"
17.109	And they will upon their faces in tears; and it will increase them in humility.
17.110	Call Him, "Allah or The Most Beneficent!" Whichsoever ye may cry to Him with, there are Beautiful Attributes for Him. And cry not to Him ebulliently, nor call on Him in despair; but seek a mid course.(449)
17.111	And say, "All Praise be to Allah!" He has no descendants, nor has associate in His Kingdom, nor has weaknesses nor in need of a helper; and magnify Him with all magnificence. 
						
Chapter 18
The Cave

18.1 	Praise be unto Allah, Who has sent down The Book without a flaw upon His servant.
18.2	Determined - to warn of a severe retribution from Him; and to give glad tidings of a beautiful reward to the believing good doers.
18.3	Abide therein forever-
18.4	And to warn them who say, "Allah has a son!"
18.5	To them or to their fathers: they have no knowledge about it; very sinful are the words that come out of their mouths; they say nothing but lies.
18.6	If they belie this 'Hadith - the Truth', it may be that you would destroy yourself in grief!
18.7	To ascertain who among them are the best in deed, We certainly made everything in the earth most decorative to it.
18.8	Again, We certainly would make it a soil, barren.
18.9	Or have you wondered at Our Signs thinking of the companions in that cave and of the covenant?
18.10	When the youngsters took to the cave for shelter, said: "Our God! Bestow on us Thy Benevolence and set our affairs aright for us!"
18.11	So We rested their ears in the cave for many a numbered year.
18.12	Then We raised them up that We make evident which of the two parties knew best the period of their stay.
18.13	We narrate their history to you in truth; they were indeed youths and believed in their God - and We increased them in Guidance.
18.14	And We made their hearts firm when they mounted and said, "Our God is the God of the heavens and the earth and we will never call as God other than He - if so then we had spoken an enormity." 
18.15	"These, our people, had taken gods besides Him; should they not bring clear proofs over them? Who is worse sinner than he, who invents against Allah a lie?"
18.16	"And secure ye, in the cave forsaking them and their deities which are not Allah; your God will provide you from His Benevolence and will make cosy your affairs for you."
18.17	And you would have seen when the sun rose, it(450) inclines away towards the right from their cave; and when it sets, it moves past on their left. And they were in a vast space therein. This is of the Signs of Allah. Whoever Allah guides, is guided; and whoso He leaves astray, there is not a helper nor a guide, never for him.
18.18	And you would think them to be wide awake though they were asleep; and We turn them on to the right and to the left and their dog has stretched out its paws on the threshold; if you see them close, you would have withdrawn in flight and fright and been filled with terror of them.
18.19	And thus We raised them up that they might ask of each other. One of them said, "How long have you been here?" They said, "We stayed for a day, or a part of a day." Then were told: "Your God alone knows how long had you tarried; so send one of you into the city, with this silver coin; let him carefully look for the purest food and bring a supply thereof; and may he be careful that he shall not reveal about you to anyone.
18.20	For if they knew you, they will stone you or turn you back to their cult; and never would you succeed then, ever.
18.21	And to make them know that Allah's words are verily truthful and certainly there is no doubt about the Hereafter, - We revealed thus, about them. When they said, "Who were they?" Said they, "Construct a memorial over them! Their God knows them best." In this, whosoever's argument prevailed, said: "Surely we shall raise a Mosque over them."
18.22	They say: 'three - the fourth is their dog'; 'five - and the sixth is their dog'- guessing at random. And again they say: 'seven - and the eighth is their dog' - say, "My God, alone knows their number; but for a few no one shall know them." So enter not into dispute about them except that which is known to the world. And seek not opinion concerning them from anyone.
18.23	And say not about anything, "I indeed will do that tomorrow!"(451)
18.24	"Except if Allah wishes!" If you forget, then remember your God and say, 'My God will Guide me to the Way easier than this!"
18.25	And they tarried in the cave nine added to three hundred years.(452)
18.26	Say: Allah knows best about their tarrying; it is unto Him what is unseen in the heavens and in the earth - He is the Seeing, Hearing. And there is no one to help them but He; and makes not a partner with Him in His Sovereignty. 
18.27	And recite that which is inspired to you from your God, of the Book; there is none to change His word and you shall not find refuge besides Him.
18.28	And observe patience with those seeking their God's pleasure, remembering Him morning and evening; and turn not away your attention from them towards the worldly attractions - and take not to his ways whose hearts We had turned away from remembering Us; for his works had transgressed because he was desirous. 
18.29	And say, "The Truth from your God - let whoso wish, believe it; let whoso wish reject it." surely We have prepared fire for the unjust; fire will surround them; and if they seek help they will be given to drink as of molten brass; it will char the faces - what an evil drink and a wretched resting. 
18.30	Certainly We shall not waste the reward of those who indeed believe and do good deeds.
18.31	For them is the paradise, the eternal dwelling beneath which rivers flow; therein they will be adorned with golden ornaments; and their attires will be of golden-green silky 'Sunthus and Isthabrak'; them, reclining upon elevated thrones - glorious is their reward and beauteous is the resting place.(453)
18.32	And say to them the examples of two men: To one of them We gave them two gardens of grape vines; and surrounded them with date palms; and between the two We set cultivation. 
18.33	Both the gardens were yielding their fruits, restricting not anything of it; and We caused gushing forth of water spring amidst them.
18.34	And he had fruits - but he proudly picked up arguments with his friend, said: "I am more in wealth than you; and stronger in respect of men."
18.35	And he entered his garden wronging himself - he said, "I do not think, this would ever perish."
18.36	"And, I do not think the Hour will ever come; and if I were to be returned to my God, I would indeed find a better place than this."
18.37	His friend said to him, "Do you disbelieve in Him, Who created you from mud and from a drop and then Who perfected you as a man?"
18.38	But Allah, He is my God; and I will not associate any one to my God.
18.39	"And when you entered your garden, though ye might see me lesser than you in wealth and people, should you not have said, 'By Allah's will, all powers are not but with Allah?'"
18.40	"It may be that my God should give me a better garden than yours and that He should send thunderbolt from the sky and make it a slope of dust."
18.41	"Or, it may be that its water had totally been sucked in so as to not to be found again."
18.42	And his produces were destroyed; then he began to wring his hands for all that he had spent upon it for they had fallen down upon their roots - he said, "Would that I had not associated partners to my God!"
18.43	And he had not a people to help him besides Allah; and was helpless.
18.44	To help him there is with Allah, the True. He is the best in the reward and the best in the decision. 
18.45	And set forth to them the similitude of the life of this world as the water We send down from the sky; the vegetations of the earth mingles with it; then they become dry  stubble and the winds scatter them; and Allah has power over all things.
18.46	Wealth and children are enticements of this world; but the everlasting good deeds are better with your God for reward and for hope.
18.47	And one day We will destroy the mountains and you will see the land levelled plain; and We will gather them, leaving not a single soul behind them.
18.48	And they will be brought before your God in ranks: 'as We created you for the first time, you have returned to Us now; but you were thinking We shall not bring this promised day for you';-
18.49	And the Book will be placed; and you will see the guilty fear struck at what they see therein. And they will say, "Woe! What is this record? Small or big nothing is left in it without a detail"; and they will see all they did, placed before them. Yet your God shall not wrong anyone.
18.50	And when We said to the angels, "Obey Adam!" Except Iblis, all obeyed; he was of the Jinn; he rebelled against the command of his God. So will you take then he and his descendants besides Me as protectors? But then they are your enemies; wretched is the exchange, for the arrogant. 
18.51	I have not made them witnesses to the creation of the heavens and the earth nor to their own creation; nor had I taken the misleaders as helpers.
18.52	And the day when he would say, 'call them those whom you claimed equal to Me'. They will call them; but they would not answer them and We will make between them a barrier.
18.53	And the criminals will see the fire and will know they are to fall into it; and they will not find a way of escape.
18.54	And We have indeed turned about for men in this Quran every kind of similitude; but man is in all things most disputatious.
18.55	And when the Guidance comes, nothing prevents man from accepting it and seeking forgiveness from their God except that what came upon those before, shall come to them; or that their torment shall come face to face with them.
18 .56	And We have not sent the messengers except as giver of glad tiding and a warner; but the wicked, to destroy the truth, contend it with falsehood - and they take My Signs and what they are warned of, in fun. 
18.57	And who is more unjust than he who slights aside them, after his God's clear admonition and forgets what his two hands have wrought? Certainly We have veiled their hearts from perceiving this and have caused deafness in their ears; therefore, if you call them to the right path, they will not be guided to it- ever.
18.58	And your God is Relenting, Merciful. If He were to catch them for what they earn, He would have hastened their agony; but they have a tryst - they will find no escape other than it.
18.59	And We destroyed the people of the city while they were unjust for We have given a tryst, for their destruction.
18.60	And when Musa said to his servant, "I will not stop until I reach the point where the two seas meet, though I go on for years."(454)
 18.61	But when they reached the meeting point, they forgot their fish; it took its way into the sea as in a tunnel.(455)
18.62	So, when they crossed that place, he said to his page, "Bring us our breakfast; we surely have fatigued in this, our journey."
18.63	He said, "Did you notice, while we were on the rock? Certainly I have forgotten the fish; none but shaitan made me forget, saying about it; further, it made its way into the sea by a marvel."
18.64	He said, "That is what we were looking for!" and followed back on their footsteps.
18.65	They saw one of our servants - to him, We had granted favours from Us and We had taught him Wisdom from Us.(456)
18.66	Musa said to him, "May I follow you so that you would teach me of the right path, you were taught?"
18.67	He said, "Certainly you will not be able to bear with me."
18.68	And, "How can you bear with that about which you have no knowledge?"(457)
18.69	He said, "If Allah wills - you will see me bearing with you; and not gainsaying in aught!"
18.70	He said, "If you are to follow me, you shall not ask me about anything till I myself narrate it to you."(458)
18.71 	Then they proceeded, till they took a boat; he made a hole in it. He said, "Did you put a hole in it to drown the passengers in it? Surely you had done an evil act?"
18.72	He said, "Did I not tell, surely you will not be able to bear with me?"
18.73	He said, "Do not take me to task for what I forgot and make not my affair difficult for me."
18.74	Then they went on until both met a lad whom he killed. He said, "Would you kill a pure soul for other than a soul? You have indeed done a grave thing!"
18.75	He said, "Did I not say to you, you cannot bear with me?"
18.76	He said, "After this if I ask you of anything, then keep me not as companion. Surely you have received from me due excuse."
18.77	Then they proceeded on their journey and came to the people of a village; they asked food from its people, but they refused to give them food; thereat, they found a wall about to collapse, and he set it erect. He said, "Oh, had you wished, you could have demanded a wage from them."(459)
18.78	He said, "This is parting between you and me; and I will explain to you concerning things you were not able to tolerate."
18.79	"The boat - it belonged to certain poor people working at sea; I purposed to make it look damaged for, behind them was a king who forcibly takes away the boats."
18.80	"And the lad - his parents are believers and we feared that he would impose on them insolence and disbelief."
18.81	"So we wished that their God shall bless them with one better than him in purity and nearer to Mercy."
18.82	"And the wall - it belongs to two orphans of that town beneath which is a treasure belonging to them; and their father was a good man; your God wished that when they come of age, they should bring forth the treasure as a mercy from your God. I did these not of my own bidding; - this is the interpretation of what you were not able to endure with me." 
18.83	And they ask you of Zulqarnain. Say: I will narrate to you a small part about him.
18.84	Verily We gave him comfort on this earth; and We gave him the way to anything.
18.85	And he proceeded on a way.
18.86	When he travelled until sunset, he found 'it' disappearing in a pool of muddy water and found a people thereabout. We said, "O Zulqarnain! you may either punish them or show the way beautiful for them."(460)
18.87	He said, "Whoever does wrong we will punish them; then he will be brought forth to his God and He will punish him with a severe punishment."
18.88	But whoever believes and does good, to him is the beautiful reward; and We will bid him the lightest of Our command.
18.89	Then he proceeded on a way.
18.90	Until he reached a place at dawn and he saw it shining upon a people; we have not made a shade between them and the sun.
18.91 	Thus it was!  And We had full knowledge of all that he had.(461)
18.92	Then he proceeded on a way. 
18.93	When he reached between two mountains, he found upon their hither side a folk, who could not understand a thing.
18.94	They said, "O Zulqarnain, surely Yajuj and Majuj cause disquiet on the land; so, shall we offer you a wage so that you could build a shield between us and them?"
18.95	He said, "What my God has endowed me with is much greater; so help me with your might and I will build a shield between you and them."
18.96	Bring me ingots of iron! And when it is piled up between the two cliffs, he said, "Blow!" When it became fire, he said, "Bring me molten brass, that I will pour over it."
18.97	So they were not able to climb it up or unable to punch holes through it.
18.98	He said, "This is nothing but a mercy from my God; but when my God's word come to pass, He would blow even this to dusts. And my God's word is true."
18.99	And on that day, We will let some of them surge against others; then Our word will be blown whereupon We will gather them as one.
18.100	And on that day We will spread the hell before the disbelievers.
18.101	They upon whose eyes were the veils against remembering Me; and were disabled to hear.
18.102	Do the disbelievers think they could take My servants as their protector beside Me? Verily, We have prepared hell as lodging for the disbelievers.
18.103	Say, "Shall I inform you who will be the greatest losers by their deeds?"
18.104 	It is they who think they are doing great works here while their efforts are hopeless in this life.
18.105	They reject their God's Signs and their meeting Him; all their deeds have become null and they will have no dignity in the future. 
18.106	That is their reward - hell, for they rejected My Signs and took My messengers in mockery.
18.107	Verily, the paradise of Firdhose will be the abode for those who believed and stayed righteous.
18.108	They will abide therein forever and wish not any other abode.
18.109	Say: "If the sea were ink for the words of my God, the sea would be spent before the words of my God are spent; and even if you bring the like thereof to help."
18.110	Say: "Verily I am a human like you; I have been inspired that your God is One - so whoso of you hopes to meet his God, let him stay righteous and associate no partners in the worship of his God."

Chapter 19
Maryam

19.1	Kaf, Ha, Yae, Ain, Saad - K, H, Y, A, S.(462)
19.2	This is the Wisdom favoured upon His servant Zachariah, by your God.
19.3	When he called upon his God in a subdued voice;
19.4	He said, "My God, surely, my bones have worn out and my hairs have become grey; my God! never was I deprived of your grace in anything I called on You."
19.5	"And I certainly fear about my relatives after me; and my wife is sterile; so grant me an heir from You."
19.6	"And he will be a heir to me and a heir to the descendants of Yaqub; and my God, make him well acceptable." (463)
19.7	"O Zachariah! surely We give you a good tiding of a son named Yahya. We have not given anyone this name before."
19.8	He said, "O my God, how shall I have a son when my wife is sterile and when I have become fragilely old."
19.9	He said: Thus said your God! "It is easy to Me; before when you were of nothing I created you!"
19.10	He said, "O my God, give me a Sign!" He said, "Your Sign is that you shall not be able to speak to people for three nights while you are healthy."
19.11	So he came out to his people from the room; then he signalled to them to praise the purity of God, morning and evening.
19.12	"O Yahya, hold fast the Book!" and We gave him the Wisdom, even as a child.
19.13	And from Us he possessed mercy and purity; and he was fearing of Allah.
19.14	And he was good to his parents; not boastful, neither rebellious.
19.15	So, 'Peace' shall be upon him the day he is born, the day he dies and the day he is raised again, alive.(464)
19.16	And remember in this scripture about Maryam. When she secluded herself from her people, to the east-;(465)
19.17	She took a veil apart from them - then We sent to her Our Ruh who presented himself before her as a perfect man.
19.18	She said, "Surely I seek refuge in the Most Abundant, from you - if you fear God;-
19.19	He said, "Verily I am but a messenger from your God to give you tiding of a pure son."
19.20	She said, "How can I have a child when no man had ever touched me and while I am not unchaste?"
19.21	He said, Your God says,"Thus!", "Easy is this for me; and We will make him a Sign for the mankind and as a blessing from Us; and this is an event decreed."
19.22	Then she conceived him and she withdrew with him, to a distant place.
19.23	Then she drew herself near to a date-palm as she felt the feeling of delivery. She said, "Would that I were dead, long forgotten!"
19.24	From beneath her, he said, "Worry not; verily your God has created a rivulet below you."
19.25	And draw near the branch of this date palm and shake it; it will drop ripe fruits upon you.
19.26	So eat and drink and have solace; and if you happen to see any one, say to them: I have vowed to fast to the Most Bountiful and that I am shall not talk to anyone this day. 
19.27 	Then she came with the child to her folks. They said, "O Maryam, surely you have brought a thing of wonder."
19.28	"O sister of Harun, your father was not astray and your mother was not unchaste!"
19.29	She signalled them to the child. They said, "How can we speak to a child in the cradle?"
19.30	He said, "Verily I am a servant of Allah; He has given me the Wisdom and has made me a Prophet."
19.31	"And He has made me blessed wheresoever I am; and has enjoined upon me that all my life I shall surrender my will to God and extend for purity."
19.32	"And to extend gratitude to my mother - and He has not made me an arrogant evil."
19.33	"Upon me be 'Peace': the day I was born, the day I will die and the day I am resurrected."
19.34	He is the son of Maryam, Esa, the word of truth about which they suspect.
19.35	It is needless that Allah should take a son unto Him; He is Most Pure. And when He intends a thing, He says to it, "Be!" and it is!(466)
19.36	And surely Allah is my God and your God; so call unto Him and it is the path straight.
19.37	Yet, the people among them differed; so woe to those who were denying the scene of the awful day.
19.38	How clear will they see and hear on the day they come to Us! Yet, the unjust today are in clear error.
19. 39	And warn them of the awful day when their affairs will be decided - and they are heedless and unbelieving.(467)
19.40	Surely We will inherit the world and those upon it and their return is unto Us.(468)
19.41	And remember Ibrahim in the Revelation. Indeed he was truthful and a Prophet.(469)
19.42	When he said to his father, "My father! why do you call upon that which neither hear, nor see and nor avail you aught?"
19.43	"My father, indeed has come to me the Wisdom that which has not come to you; so follow me and I will guide you to the right path."
19.44	"My father, worship not shaitan; shaitan indeed is disobedient to the Most Beneficent."
19.45	"My father, I fear some torment from the Most Beneficent will smite thee indeed, so that you become a companion of shaitan." 
19.46	He said, "Are you rejecting my deities? Ibrahim, if you do not stay clear, surely I will stone you; so be off, forever away."
19.47	He said, "May peace be upon you; and I will seek forgiveness for you from my God; surely He is ever gracious to me."
19.48	And, "I withdraw from you and that which you worship besides Allah; I will seek from my God, haply I am not unblest from whatever I had asked of my God."
19.49	So when he stayed away from them and those they worshipped besides Allah, We gifted him Ishaq and Yaqub and We made them each, prophet.
19.50	And We gifted them from Our Mercy and We assigned to them a honour and true renown.
19.51	And remember also Musa in the Revelation. Surely he was devoted; and was a messenger, a prophet.
19.52	And We called out to the 'righteous from the Thur!' And We drew him nigh in communion.(470)
19.53	And We gifted him from Our grace his brother Harun, as a prophet.
19.54	And remember Ismail in the Revelation. Indeed he was truthful to his word; and he was a messenger, a prophet.
19.55	And he enjoined upon his folks that they shall obey the Will of God and spend of the pure things; and he was most agreeable to his God.
19.56	And remember Idris in the Revelation. He was indeed truthful and a prophet.
19.57 	And We raised him to a high.
19.58	They are the prophets of the descendants of Adam, of those whom We embarked upon with Nuh, of Ibrahim, of the descendants of Israel and of those whom We had chosen and guided in righteousness - upon them Allah showered His blessings; when the Signs of the Most Beneficent are exemplified to them, they would fall prostrate with tears.
19.59	And after them their descendants took hold of their offices; they made the worship a ritual and practised their desires in it. So soon they will meet evil.(471)
19.60	Except those who repent and believe and stay aright will enter the heaven; they will not be lessened in aught.
19.61	And the Most Beneficent promised the heavens of 'ADHNU' to His bondsmen even as they could not perceive them; surely His promise will happen. 
19.62	They would not hear anything unworthy except 'Peace' therein; and in the mornings and in the evenings they will have their needs in full. 
19.63	We will make the God fearing of our servants inherit such paradise.
19.64	And we will never descend without the command of your God; to Him is what is before us, what is after us and what is between that - and your God is not forgetful. 
19.65	God! to the heavens and to the earth and to all that are in between; so call on Him alone and seek patience from Him, serving Him. Do you find one equal to Him?
19.66	And man says: "What! if I die, wilt it be that I wilt be raised up alive?"
19.67	"Should not man think, We created him before, when he was naught?"
19.68	So, by your God, We will surely gather them and the shaitans; then We will present them around the hell on their knees.
19.69	Then verily, We will separate from every sect all of those who were insolent against the Most Beneficent.(472)
19.70	Then verily We know the leader who befits burned therein, first.(473)
19.71	And none of you, there is, but he shall pass over it; this is your God's decree.(474)
19.72 	But We will deliver whosoever were God fearing, leaving the wrong doers therein, on their knees.
19.73	And when Our signs are espoused to them, the rejecters amidst the believers say, "Whose living standards are better and whose assembly is fairer of the two of us?"
19.74	But how many a generation more powerful with beautiful presentations have We destroyed before them?
19.75	Say, "The Most Benevolent surely has prolonged the life-span for those who are astray, until they shall see their promised fate or the Hereafter; and they shall know whose house is the most evil? Whose might is the weakest?" 
19.76	And those who are aright, Allah increases them in guidance; and with your God the best reward and the best abiding is for the lasting good deeds.
19.77 	Did you see him who rejecting Our Signs says, "I shall indeed be given wealth and people"?
19.78	Has he penetrated to the unseen? Or has he a pact with the Most Benevolent?
19.79	Nay! We shall record his say and We shall add and add to his torment.
19.80	And We shall record all his talks; and he shall come to Us singly.
19.81	They had taken to them gods other than Allah that they might be for them a might.
19.82	Nay. They would deny their worshiping them and become opponents unto them.
19.83	Do you not see that We have sent shaitans to ever induce the disbelievers? 
19.84	So hasten not for them; We count for them a count.
19.85	On the day, when We assemble all the God fearing to Us, the Most Benevolent;
19.86	And will drive the perpetrators toward the hell, thirsty.
19.87	No one shall have the authority to intercede except those who were in pact with the Most Benevolent.(475)
19.88	And they say, "The Benevolent has taken a son unto Him."(476)
19.89	Surely you have brought forth something hideous.
19.90	At it, the heavens are well nigh to the rent of it, the earth to cleave asunder and the mountains are near to crashing to dusts.(477)
19.91	That they attribute a son unto the Most Benevolent;
19.92	And it is not worthy for The Benevolent that He should have a son.
19.93	None is there in the heavens and earth but he comes as a slave to the Benevolent. 
19.94	Verily He encompasses them all and has counts of them in exactness.
19.95	And on the Hour they would come to Him, alone.
19.96	Indeed, the Benevolent will cause affection for those who were believers and righteous.
19.97	So We have made easy this, in your language that therewith you may give glad tidings to the God fearing and to therewith warn those who dispute it.
19.98	And how many a generation have We destroyed before them! Do you see any one of them? Or do you hear even a whisper of them?
	
Chapter 20
Ta Ha

20.1	Tha Ha(478)
20.2	We have not sent down this Quran upon you for you to suffer difficulty.
20.3	But a reminder to those who fear.
20.4	It has been sent down from the Creator of the earth and the high heavens.
20.5	The Most Benevolent, established Himself upon the Throne. 
20.6	To Him what is in the heavens, what is on the earth, what is in between and what is in the depth of the earth.
20.7	And if you cry aloud! Surely He knows the secrets and the Unseen.
20.8	Allah! There is none to call upon but He and to Him are the most beautiful Names.
20.9	And did you receive the 'Hadith' of Musa?(479)
20.10	He saw a light and said to his family, "Stay here; surely I saw a light - either there may be a brand for you or find some guidance at the fire."(480)
20.11	And when he came to it, he was called: O Musa!
20.12	"Surely I am your God; put off your shoes; indeed you are upon the blessed valley, 'Thuwa'."
20 13	"And I chose you; so listen to the Revelation."
20.14	"Surely I am Allah; there is no God but Me. So call upon Me and stay constant in My remembrance."
20.15	"Verily the Hour of recompense is to arrive to each for their deeds; yet I wish to keep it secret."
20.16	"Let not one who believes it not but follows his desires deviate you away from it, lest thou perish!"
20.17	"Musa, what is in your right hand?"
20.18	He said, "This is my staff; I lean upon it; I tug down leaves for my sheep and there are certain benefits to me from it."
20.19	Said He, "Musa, cast it down!"
20.20	As he cast it down, thereupon it became a serpent, gliding.
20.21	Said He, "Catch it and fear not; We shall revert it."
20.22	And push your hand to your side; it will come out white without blemish. This is another Sign!"
20.23	"We show you of the Grand Signs of Us!"
20.24	"Go to Firaun; surely he has  transgressed!"
20.25	He said, "O my God, relax my heart for me;"
20.26	"And make my affairs smooth for me;"
20.27	"And free my tongue of its knot;"
20.28	"That they may listen to my words."
20.29	"And give me a helping soul from my family."
20.30	"My brother, Harun!"
20.31	"Strengthen my back by him."
20.32	"And make him my deputy."
20.33	"That we may purify Your glory more!"
20.34	"And remember You often!"
20.35	"Surely You are ever aware of us!"
20.36	He said, "O Musa! verily you were granted your request;
20.37	"And indeed We had bestowed blessing upon you before;
20.38	"Remember when We revealed to your mother through inspiration;
20.39	"Put him in a chest and leave him in the river; the river will bring it to the bank; and there, the enemy of Me and the enemy of him will receive him; and I showered My love upon you that you shall bloom under My eyes."
20.40	"Your sister came and said, 'Shall I show you one who may care take for him?' Thus, We returned you to your mother that her eyes are cooled and shall be free from sorrow. Then you killed a man; and then too We delivered you from the gravity of it; then We tested you with trials and thereafter you stayed with 'Madyans' many years. Then, O Musa, you reached formation. 
20.41	And, "I have formed you to serve Me."
20.42	"So you and your brother go forth with My Signs! And tire not in My remembrance!"(481)
20.43	"You both go to Firaun; surely he has waxed insolence!"
20.44	"Speak with him gently perchance he may heed or fear."
20.45	They said, "Our God, indeed we fear he shall hasten against or aggress on us."
20.46	He said, "Fear ye not; surely I am with you twain listening to and seeing."
20.47	"So go to him" and say, "Surely we both are your God's messengers; so send the people of Israel with us and aggrieve them not; surely we had brought from your God a Sign unto you; and whosever follows righteousness, upon them shall be Peace."
20.48	It has been revealed to us that surely there will be torment to those who cry lies and turns away.
20.49	Said, "Musa! who is the God of you?"
20.50	He said, "Our God is He who fashioned each creation into perfect form and function."
20.51	Said, "If it is so what about the generations who have gone before?"
20.52	He said, "The fate of such is with my God; my God neither falters nor forgets."
20.53	He spread out the earth for you; and made the ways therein easy for you; and sent down waters from the sky and therewith We produce forth pairs of divers kinds of vegetations.
20.54	Eat and pasture your cattle; surely therein are the Signs for the knowledgeable.
20.55	Thereof We created you, and We shall return you into it, and We will bring you forth form it a second time.
20.56	And We verily did show him all Our Signs; but he belied and refused.
20.57	He said, "O Musa, have you come here with your magic to drive us out of our land?"
20.58	"If so, we too will surely show magic, the like of it. So commit upon a day and fix a place mutually agreeable that neither we nor you shall fail it."
20.59	He said, "The Ceremonial Day! - let it be the day for you and the morning when all the people gather together."
20.60	Thus: Firaun went and returned gathering his guile.
20.61	Musa said to them, "Woe to you, forge not against Allah a lie; He will exterminate you by His torment; and whoever lies, is destroyed."
20.62	Then, they discussed among them and kept their devising a secret.
20.63	They said, "Certainly, these two are magicians; they both, through their magics wish to drive you from your land and to do away with your traditional rituals." 
20.64	So all of you plan your decisions jointly and come in ranks; this day whoever overcomes will surely be the victor. 
20.65	They said, "O Musa, do you cast, or shall we be the first to cast?"
20.66	He said, "Nay; thou cast first! it seemed to him that their ropes and staffs as real things by their magic, gliding and moving."
20.67	Then Musa conceived a fear within him,-
20.68   	We said, "Fear not, surely you will overcome."
20.69	And, "Cast that you have in your right hand; it will swallow up all they did; what they did was the devising of a sorcerer; and the sorcerer succeed not wherever he goes."
20.70	Defeated facedown, the sorcerers said, "We believe in the God of Harun and Musa."
20.71	He said, "Have you believed in him before I permit you? He indeed is your leader who taught you magic; so, surely I will cut off your alternate hands and legs and have you crucified on the trunks of palm-trees; and shall ye know for certain, which of us are more severe in punishing and who shall last therein."
20.72	They said, "We will not take you above the clear proofs that has come to us and He who has created us; so pronounce what you are to announce and all that you pronounce is only in this world."
20.73	"Our wrong doings, and for having been forced into sorcery; - we certainly believe only in our God for our forgiveness; and Allah is Most High and Ever Preserving."
20.74	Indeed whoever comes before his God as unjust, to him is hell for sure wherein he shall neither die nor live.
20.75	And whoever comes before him as believers and righteous - indeed for them are ranks, sublime.
20.76	For them are the preserving paradises beneath which rivers flow; they would abide therein forever; and this is the reward for the pure.
20.77	And We thus inspired Musa: "Set forth with my servants by night and strike for them a dry path in the sea; and apprehend not, 'he would seize you! And fear not.'
20.78	And Firaun followed them with his might, but the sea overwhelmed them.
20.79	And Firaun led astray his society and he showed not the straight path.
20.80	O the descendants of Israel, We indeed delivered you from your enemy; and We promised all righteous benefits of the Thur. And We sent down upon you the pure foods from above and from below@(482).
20.81	And eat of the pure foods that We have provided you; cause not mischief @(483); upon you shall descend My anger. And upon whoso My anger descends, indeed he shall be destroyed.
20.82	And whoever repents and strives in righteousness, believing; and takes to guidance, - indeed to him I am Oft-Returning.
20.83	And, "O Musa, what hastened you leaving your people?"
20.84	He said, "They are upon my footsteps! And my God, I hastened to You that You may be satisfied with me."
20.85	He said, "Then We tested your people firmly; but 'Samiriyu' had misled them."
20.86	So Musa returned to his people, deeply disturbed and angered. He said, "O my people! Did not your God give you a beautiful promise? And has the promised been increased upon you? Or did you wrong me against your promise so that the wrath of your God should descend upon you?"
20.87	They said, "We did not within our powers do a wrong to the covenant we made with you; but we were loaded with a burden from our adornments; then, we threw it; Samiriyu did throw too."
20.88	Then he brought out for them, an idol of the calf which 'lowed'; Some said, "This is your God and the God of Musa, but he had forgotten."
20.89	Did they not see it does not answer them and has no power either to do good or evil to them?
20.90	Before, verily Harun said to them, "O my people, surely you are put to test by this; and verily your God is the Most Benevolent; so follow me and obey my command."
20.91	They said, "We will not stop worshiping this until Musa returns to us."
20.92	He said, "O Harun! what prevented you when you saw them going astray!"
20.93	"From following after me? Did you disobey my command?
20.94	He said, "O son of my mother! clutch not my beard nor my head." I feared lest you should say, 'you caused division among the people of Israel or you did not wait for my word.'
20.95	He said, "What have you to say, Samiriyu?"
20.96	He said, "I saw what they saw not in it. So I took a handful from the footstep of that messenger and threw it. Thus my mind made it fair seeming to me."
20.97	He said, "Get ye gone! surely what befits you in this world is to go about saying, 'I'm untouchable!' And you will have your appointment, promised and you shall not escape it. And see your God which you insolently worshiped! Surely we will burn it to dust and scatter it into the sea."
20.98	Your God is One, Allah. There is no God other than He. He embraces everything in His knowledge.
20.99	Thus do we narrate the histories of those who have gone before you; and We have certainly given you from Us, that you can reminisce. 
20.100	Whoever rejects it certainly shall bear the burden on the Hour(484).
20.101	Abide therein; and on the Hour of Destiny, what they shall bear is an evil burden.
20.102	On the Day of Final Call, the guilty will be gathered by Us, blue in their eyes.
20.103	They will say amongst them: You stayed not beyond ten.
20.104	We know well the righteous among them saying: You stayed not but a day.
20.105	And they ask you about the mountains. Say: My God will burst them into scattered dusts.
20.106	And make it, an empty plain.
20.107	You will not see a hill or a hollow.
20.108	On that Day, they will follow the caller; no hesitation in it; and all the sounds will subdue before the Benevolent; and you shall hear naught but the footsteps.
20.109	That Day, none else's prayer will avail but for him to whom the Benevolent had given leave and whose words He approves.
20.110	He is cognisant of what is before them and what is after them; but they comprehend it not in knowledge.
20.111	And before the Giver of Life and the Eternal, all their faces will hang down; so he who bears sins, is the loser of all good.
20.112	And he who believes and stay righteous shall not fear that he will be wronged nor his reward will be curtailed.
20.113	And thus We had sent down the Quran, in Arabic, so that they would fear God; and that they may give thought to the hadiths; We had detailed in it as warning.
20.114	So the True King, Allah is the Most High. And hasten not to expound Quran before it is revealed to you and completed on you by your God through inspiration. And seek, "O my God, increase me in Wisdom."(485)
20.115	And before We surely took covenant from Adam; but he forgot; and We did not find steadfastness in him.(486)
20.116	And when We said to the inhabitants of the skies, "Obey Adam!" All obeyed except Iblis; he refused.(487)
20.117	Then We said, "O Adam! Surely he is enemy to you and your wife; so do not allow him to cause you to oust you out of the paradise; if so you should suffer."
20.118	"Surely you shall not be hungry nor suffer adversity;
20 119	"And you shall not be thirsty nor suffer the shine."(488)
20.120	But shaitan caused him to differ when he said, "O Adam! shall I show you the way for the eternal life and Kingdom?"(489)
20.121	Then they fell for the evil and tasted them all; both their shame became evident and they covered them with the leaves of the paradise. Thus Adam, the man forgot his God and lost the way.
20.122	Then His God chose him, pardoned and guided.
20.123	Said He, "Descend all together henceforth, some of you disputing some others; then from Me guidance shall come to you; whoever follows My guidance will not go astray; neither will he lose his rank."(490)
20.124	And whoever turns away from My remembrance - he indeed will find his life in straits. And on the day of resurrection, We will raise him blind.
20.125	He will say, "My God! I was able to see; why have You raised me in the darkness?
20.126 	He would say, "Our Signs came to you but you forgot; thus, this day you are forgotten."(491)
20.127	And thus We would reward those who reject and aggress against the words of his God; and the torment thenceforth will be severe and lasting.
20.128	Has not the generations We have destroyed before them, guided them aright? And they travel upon where they dwelled. Surely in it are the Signs to those who give a thought.
20.129	And it would have come to pass but for a word from your God had gone before and of a period. 
20.130	So bear with them; praise your God's purity before the rising of the sun and before its setting and in the hours of the night; and glorify Him at the ends of the day that you shall be gratified.
20.131	And stretch not your eyes toward certain people whom We had allowed to taste the pleasure, a beautification We had made as only a trial for them in it; and what your God has in store is lasting excellence.
20.132	Enthuse your folks to surrender to the Will of God; and bear with it and forbear; We are not to seek a thing of you - We give you your needs; and in the end the best position is to he who fears God.
20.133	And they say, "Why has he not brought a Sign to us from his God?" Have not clear Signs of God's words come to them before?(492)
20.134	But, had We punished them and destroyed them before the signs came to them, they should say, "O God, would that You had sent us a messenger, we would have followed Your warnings before we are disgraced and despised."
20.135	Say: "All are waiting! So wait. You shall know who are in guidance and who are righteous."
	
Chapter 21
The Prophets
	
21.1	For mankind, their time of reckoning draws nigh - but they are heedless and turning away.
21.2	When there comes unto them the Hadiths from their God as a reminder, they hear it not but mockingly.(493)
21.3	Their minds are unheedful; and the wicked secretly say to themselves, "He is but a man like you; do you come to the magic while you see?"
21.4	He said, "My God encompasses every word uttered in the heavens and in the earth. And He is All Hearing, All Knowing."
21.5	And they say, "Nay, confused dreams - nay, he has imagined them; nay, he is a poet; so let him bring us a sign as has been sent before."
21.6	And no township We had destroyed before them, believed; then are these going to believe?
21. 7	And before you, We sent not but men; We sent revelations to them; so if you cannot understand seek from those who have comprehension.
21.8	And We did not make them bodies not eating the food, nor were they immortals.
21.9	Then We fulfilled the promise to them; thus We saved them and whom We willed. But We did destroy the transgressors.
21.10	We have certainly sent down to you the Book; therein is the reminder unto you; then, will you not give a thought?
21.11	And how many a wicked town did We destroy? And thereafter We created other generations.
21.12	So when they perceived Our torment, they began to run therefrom.
21.13	Run not! Return to your pleasures and to your houses. You are to be questioned.
21.14	They cried, "Woe to us! We were indeed unjust."
21.15	And their cry ceased not till we made them as stubble, silent and still.
21.16	And We have not created the heavens and the earth and everything in between for fun.
21.17	Had fun been Our wish, surely We would have taken it from Our presence.
21.18	Nay, We throw the truth upon the falsehood; so it destroys them - and it gets shattered; then woe to you for that you ascribe.
21.19	And to Him belongs what is in the heavens and in the earth; those who are inclined to Him will not be boastful, disobeying Him - and they tire not.
21.20	They purify Him night and day, without a pause.
21.21	Or the deities they had taken from the earth as their Gods give life?
21.22	Had there been Gods besides Allah surely both these would have perished. Allah is the Most Wise; Glory be to Him, the Most Pure from all they describe.
21.23	None shall question Him what He does; rather it is them who will be questioned.
21.24	Or have they taken Gods besides Him? Say, "Bring your proof; and here is the clear thought of those with me and the wisdom of those before me." Most of them are ignorant of the truth and so they turn aside.
21.25	And We sent not any messenger before you but inspiring him, "Verily there is no God but Me; so call upon Me alone."
21.26	And they say: "The Beneficent has taken a son. He is most Pure; nay, servants dignified!"
21.27	They do not advance before Him in word, but they do what they were commanded by Him.
21.28	He knows what is before them and what is behind them; and they will not intercede except upon whom He is pleased with; and they remain in awe for fear of Him.
21.29	And if any one of them says, "Indeed I am God besides Him, We recompense with hell; thus do We recompense the unjust."
21.30	Do the disbelievers not observe that surely the skies and the earth were close together and that We separated them; and that We created every living thing from water? Do they not believe?"
21.31	And We planted mountains firm on the earth lest it shakes with them; and in order that they find ways, We made for them expanded passages.
21.32	And We made the sky a protective covering; yet they are indifferent to the proofs therein.
21.33	And He created the night and the day; and the sun and the moon - each swimming within its orbit.
21.34	And We gave no man before you eternity; so if you die will they live forever?
21.35	Everyone is to taste the death and We put you to trial, testing you with evil and good; then you will be returned to Us.
21.36	And when the disbelievers see you, they would not but mock at you and say, "Is this the one who mentions of your Gods?" And they reject the very remembrance of the Bountiful.
21.37	Man is ever hasty; soon I shall show you My Signs and so hasten Me not.
21.38	And they say, "When is this promise, if you are truthful?"
21.39	If only the unbelievers knew the Hour, when they will not be able to save their faces and their backs from the fire nor would they be helped; -
21.40	Nay, it will come to them suddenly, bewildering them; they will not be able to avert them; nor will they be respited.
21.41	And messengers before you were indeed mocked at; but their own mockery surrounded them.
21.42	Say, "Who will protect you from the Beneficent in the night and in the day? Yet they reject the very remembrance of their God."
21.43	Or do they have protecting Gods besides Us? They cannot help themselves; and they will not be protected from Us.
21.44 	Yet, We allowed them and their fathers taste the pleasures of the word all their lives. See they not their lands shrinking? Do they excel Us?(494)
21.45	Say, "I indeed warn you by revelation; yet the deaf do not hear when they are warned!"(495)
21.46	If a whiff of a torment of your God touches them they would surely say, "Alas for us; we were transgressors!"
21.47	And on the lasting day, We judge on justness; no one will be wronged in aught; We will weigh in, even if it is of the weight of a mustard; We are able, to account thus.
21.48	And indeed We gave Musa and Harun "The Distinguishment". It is The Light and The Reminder to the God fearing.(496)
21.49	They will fear their God in their souls; and they will be afraid of the Hour.
21.50	And it is a Blessed Reminder We have sent down; is it this, you reject?
21.51	And We certainly gave Ibrahim of old his proper course; We know well about him.
21.52	When he said to his father and his folks, "What are these idols that you worship?"
21.53	They said, "We found our forefathers worshiping them."
21.54	He said, "Indeed you and your forefathers have been in manifest error."
21.55	They said, "Have you brought us the Truth or are you of the joking?"
21.56	He said, "Nay, your God is the God of the heavens and the earth; He created them and I am of the bearers of witness."
21.57	"And after you had gone back, I will certainly by Allah, cause a thing to your idols."
21.58	Thus, but for the large deity, he broke them all into pieces, would that they give a thought.(497)
21.59	They said, "Who did this to our deities? Certainly he will be of the wrong-doers?"
21.60	They said, "We heard an youngster has been saying of them; he was Ibrahim."
21.61	They said, "Then bring him before the eyes of the people that they may bear witness."
21.62	They said, "O Ibrahim, is it you who did this to our deities?"
21.63	He said, "Nay, here is the Mighty deity; this should have done this; so if they could speak ask them."(498)
21.64	They turned to one another and said, "Surely you had done a wrong thing!"
21.65	Then they were made to hang their heads down and said, "You know well they do not speak!"
21.66	He said, "Do you worship besides Allah, which neither cause good nor harm to you?"
21.67	"Alas for you and woe to that you worship besides Allah. Do you not understand this?"
21.68	They said, "If you wish, burn him! Help your deities!"(499)
21.69	We said, "O Fire! Cool down on Ibrahim and give him solace!"
21.70	And then for him they contrived but We made them losers.(500)
21.71	And We made him and Lut take refuge on the land We have blessed with for all the worlds.
21.72	And We blessed him with Ishaq and then gave him Yaqub; We made them all righteous.
21.73	And by Our Command We have made them leaders guiding; and We inspired to them to do good, to obey Allah's Command and to help others of their provisions pure; and they were righteous for Us.
21.74	And Lut - We gave him Wisdom and the Comprehension of the Unseen; and We saved him from the town that did abominations - verily they were folks lewd and evil.
21.75	And We have admitted him into Our Mercy and verily he was of the righteous.
21.76	And Nuh - when he called before, We answered him; and We delivered him and his family from a very grave situation.
21.77	And We helped him from the people who belied Our Signs; they indeed were a people wicked - so We drowned them all.
21.78	And Dawood and Sulaiman - when they judged upon a dispute concerning a field wherein the sheep of their people had strayed in on their crops, We were witness to their contemplation.(501)
21.79	Thereat, We made it clear to Sulaiman and We gave them both The Truth and The Wisdom; and to Dawood We subjected the mountains and the birds; and they were praising the Purity of their God with him - and We did these.(502)
21.80	And We taught him the making of coats of mail to protect you when you fight the war - will you then show thanks?
21.81	And to Sulaiman the winds of the tempest which, by his command reached the place We had blessed; and of everything We are All-Knowing.
21.82	And from among shaitans - they will deep dive for him and do other work besides; and We kept guard over them.
21.83	When Ayyub submitted to his God and said, "Surely distress has touched me; You are the Most Merciful of the merciful."
21.84	We accepted his submission and delivered him of the distress; We gave him his family and the likes thereof in good number; a Mercy from Us and a reminder to those abiding.
21.85	And Ismail, Idris and Zulkifl - all were of the people of great patience.
21.86	And We encompassed them into Our Mercy; surely they were of the righteous.
21.87	And Zunnun - when he went away in anger, he thought We will not hold him to account; so, when he submitted in the darkness, "There is no God but You; You are most Pure; I have indeed become of the wrong doers."
21.88	So We accepted his submission and delivered him from his great grief; thus would We deliver those who believe.
21.89	And Zachariah - he said to his God, "My God! Leave me not alone! You are the most High of the inheritors.
21.90	So, We accepted his call; We cured his wife and blessed him with Yahya; they all were active in good deeds; and they submitted with belief and fear for God; and they were humble to Us.
21.91	And she who has preserved her chastity: We breathed from Ourself into her Soul - thus made her and her son a Sign unto the people of the worlds.
21.92	Verily, you are one community; and I am your God; Obey Me alone.
21.93	Then they differed upon their assumptions; their return is unto Us.
21.94	Those who believe and stay righteous, their efforts will not go waste; verily We record them.
21.95	And whichever city We have destroyed, it is forbidden to them; they certainly shall not return.
21.96	When the way is opened for Yajuj and Majuj they will slide down from their high pride.(503)
21.97	If the Promised Hour draws nigh, the disbelievers eyes would become a fixed stare. Alas to us! Verily we had been neglectful of this - nay, we had been wicked.
21.98	Verily you and those whom you called besides Allah are the fuels of hell; thereunto ye will come.
21.99	Had they been Gods they would not have come down to this; and therein will all abide.
21.100	For them therein is the groaning torment and therein is not a hearing.
21.101	Verily, those to whomever Good from Us has led them forth, will be far removed from it. 
21.102	They will not hear the tumult; and they will forever abide in their wishful life.
21.103	Fear will not haunt them; the angels will come to them saying, "This is your promised Day!"
21.104	The day when We roll up the skies like rolling up a scroll! We will originate the creations just as We created it in the beginning; this is a Promise upon Us; and We will do it.(504)
21.105	And verily We have inscribed in Zabur that surely My righteous servants shall inherit the earth.
21.106	For the abiding people surely this has enough in it.
21.107	And We have sent you not but as a Mercy unto the worlds.
21.108	Say, "I have been inspired that your God is One; so will you submit?"
21.109	But if they disobey, say: "I have revealed to you all equally; and I know not whether what has been promised to you is near or far!"
21.110	He surely encompasses what you speak openly and what you conceal.
21.111	And I know not if it is a reprisal or a respite for you!
21.112	"O my God! Judge in Truth!" He said. "Our God is Most Merciful and His succor is ever to be sought against what you attribute!"





Chapter 22
The Wish
	
22.1	O Mankind! Fear your God. Indeed, the shaking of the Hour will be a Mighty event.
22.2	On the day when ye behold it, every nursing mother will forget her suckling baby and every pregnant woman will deliver her burden; and, you will see mankind losing sense; it is not losing the sense, but the torment of Allah is severe.
22.3	And among men are those who dispute about Allah without the knowledge and who follows each froward devil.
22.4	It has been mentioned: whoever takes him for a friend, verily, he causes crookedness and directs him to the burning hell. 
22.5	O Mankind! If you are doubtful about being raised again, then We surely created you from dust, and from a drop, and from a clot, and from the formed and unformed bulk of tissues - that We make you know; and We settle that which We wish, in the womb for a term determined; then We deliver you as a child. Then that you may reach your youth; and among you is he who dies and he who is left to reach his decrepit age and becomes like ignorant although he was knowledgeable before. And you see the parched land, and when We bring rain upon it, it is a pastureland.
22.6	It is because Allah! He is the Truth. He quickens the dead; and that He has Power over all things.
22.7	And the Hour shall come; there is no doubt thereof; Allah will raise those who are in the graves.
22.8	And among men is he who disputes about Allah without wisdom, without guidance and without clear proofs.
22.9	He, turning away with arrogance, deviates the people from the path of Allah; he will be disgraced in this world; and on the lasting Day, he will be made to taste the torment of hell fire.
22.10	This is what your hands had sent forth; and, Allah is not ever unjust to His servants.
22.11	There is also among men who call upon Allah, sitting on the border; if any good touches him he is satisfied with it; but if a trial touches him, he turns away his face - such are the losers in the present world and in the Hereafter. And this is the manifest loss. 
22.12	He calls upon that neither cause harm or good to him but Allah; this is the path far away astray.
22.13	He calls upon him whose evil is nearer than his good; indeed, evil is his protector and an evil friend at that.
22.14	Indeed, Allah makes those who believe and stay righteous enter the gardens beneath which rivers flow - verily Allah does what He will.
22.15	Whoever thinks, 'Allah will not help in this world and the Hereafter', let him extend a thread unto the sky and snap it and see if this act of him removes that whereat he rages.
22.16	And thus We had sent down Clear Signs, and Allah indeed guides whom He will.
22.17	Indeed those who have believed, and the Jews, and the sabians; and those who have become Christians and Majusis; and those who have set up partners to Allah - indeed, between them Allah will judge on the Day of Reckoning; surely Allah is a witness over all things.(505)
22.18	Behold not thee! those in the skies and on the earth; and the sun and the moon and the stars; and the mountains and the gardens and the cattle, obey Allah? And upon men and upon many among men doom has been justly cast; and whoso Allah disgraces, none shall grace him. Allah surely does what He intends.
22.19	Both the parties dispute about their God; and, whoso rejects for them is the clothing of fire and upon their heads will be poured the scalding water;
22.20	With that will be melted that which is in their bellies and their skins;
22.21	And for them are the iron fetters;
22.22	In their agony, when they try to escape it, they will be pushed into it: "Taste the punishment of burning fire!"
22.23	Verily, Allah will make those who believe and stay righteous, enter the gardens beneath which rivers flow; they will be adorned therein with ornaments of gold and pearls; and, therein their attires will be of silk. 
22.24	And they had been guided towards the words of the Most Truthful; and towards the path of the Most Glorious.
22.25	Indeed those who reject - and while the inhabitants and the outsiders are in a peaceful habitation, whoever prohibit them in the God endowed shelters for the mankind, and who causes obstruction in the path of Allah and who unjustly transgress in it - We shall make him taste the torment of a very painful punishment.
22.26	And when We fixed for Ibrahim his place of living and said, "Do not associate anyone with Me; and keep My House pure for those who Honour it; and to those who are humble in it and to those who submit and surrender to God."
22.27	And say about Hajj to people! They will come to you by walk, and from far away distance and upon their lean camels.(506)
22.28	So that they may witness their reward and to pronounce Allah's Name upon the cattle Allah has provided them on the days of need - so eat ye of it and feed therewith the have-nots too.
22.29	And that they shall put in their best efforts, fulfil their vow and that they shall honour their Abode.
22.30	This! And whoever honours the purity of Allah, such deed is the most beautiful with his God; and the cattle is made lawful to you except that which has been clarified to you; so turn away from the enchantment of the idols and forbid from saying the words of the lie.
22.31	Be truthful unto Allah, ascribing no partners to Him; and whoso ascribe unto Him partners it is as though he has fallen from the sky and the birds have snatched him up or he was blown by wind to a far off place.
22.32	This! whoever stands witness to Allah's Signs, it is indeed due to fear for his conscience.(507)
22.33	In such Signs are benefits for you for a stated term; and your return is unto your sacrifice, by your conscience.
22.34	And that they praise the Name of Allah upon the livestock, beneficial to them; and We have made sacrifice mandatory to everyone; so your God is One God! Submit unto Him! And give glad news to the humble!
22.35	Their hearts quiver at the mention of Allah; and they will endure their difficulties, look up to their God; and give others of what We have blessed them with.
22.36	And the cattle - We have made them for you of Allah's Symbols; in them are benefits to you; so when they stand remember Allah's Name; and when they had laid on their sides, eat of it and give to those who are content and to the poor - thus, We have subjected them to you that you may show gratitude.(508)
22.37	The meat or their blood does not reach Allah but subjecting your soul for the fear of Him shall - that you may keep up His truthfulness and that He may Guide you; thus He had subjected them to you. So give glad tiding to the righteous.
22.38	Allah indeed protects the believers. Allah surely does not love the beguiler and the hypocrites.
22.39	It is allowed upon the aggressed for they were wronged; and, Allah indeed suffices them as a Helper with Power.
22.40	They were driven from their houses unjustly for that they said, "Our God is Allah!" Had He not stopped some with some others, the monasteries, churches, synagogues and the masjids wherein Allah's names are remembered more, would have been destroyed - and, whoever helps Allah, He surely helps him. Allah indeed is Powerful, Mighty.
22.41	And such of them - if We provide them sufficiently in the earth, they will submit to Him, surrendering; and provide of the pure provisions; they will bid good and forbid evil. And with Allah is the end of all affairs.
22.42	And if they belie you, so were the people of Nuh, Aad, and Samud indeed belied before them-
22.43	And the people of Ibrahim and the people of Lut.
22.44	And the people of Madyan; and Musa were belied - yet I gave respite to those who belied and then I seized them. How was then My punishment?
22.45    	How many a nation We have destroyed while they were wrongdoing; it fell on its roof; and how many wells lay deserted - and well-built castles.
22.46    	Have they not journeyed through the earth that they had perceiving hearts and listening ears? surely their eyes are not blind but blind are their hearts, in their chests.
22.47    	And they urge you to hasten on the torment; Allah never goes back on His promise; and, a day with your God is, as a thousand years in your reckoning.
22.48   	 And how many a wronging nation did I give respite; then I seized them; and, to Me is the return.
22.49    	Say, "O Men, I am but a plain warner unto you."
22.50    	"So those who believe and do good, for them is forgiveness and generous provision."
22.51    	"But whoever strive to belie Our Signs they are inmates of hell."
22.52   	And it is not that Shaitan has not cast corruption on the command before you, each time We sent a messenger or a prophet with Our Command; but Allah, annulling the corruption Shaitan has cast, He strengthens His Signs. And Allah is Knowing, Wise.
22.53     The corruption Shaitan casts - as only a trial for those in whose hearts is the disease and those whose hearts are hard; and surely the unjust are in open schism.
22.54     And that those who were given wisdom shall see it as the truth from your God and believe in it; their hearts totally submit and surrender to Him. And Allah does ever guide the believers to the straight path.
22.55     And the rejecters do not cease to be in doubt until the end comes upon them suddenly or until the punishment of a barren day catches them.
22.56   	Sovereignty on that day belongs to Allah; He will judge among them and hence those who believe and stay righteous will be in the blessed heavens.
22.57    And it is for those who belied Our Signs, is the disgraceful torment.
22.58    	And whoever is killed or dies in the path of Allah deserting their homes, surely Allah provides them with an excellent provision. And indeed Allah is the best in bestowing.
22.59    	Surely He will make them enter where they wish to; and verily, Allah is Knowing, Forbearing.(509)
22.60    	This - whoso punishes to the extent he was wronged; but then exceeds limits, then Allah will surely succour him; surely Allah is Relenting, Most Forgiving.(510)
22.61   	This - Surely Allah causes the night enter the day and causes the day enter the night. And surely Allah is Hearing, Seeing.(511)

Chapter 23
The Believers
23.1     	Certainly the believers have become victorious
23.2    	Who fear God in their servitude.
23.3    	And they who will turn away from vain talks.
23.4    	And they who spend of the pure things.
23.5    	And they who will guard against secret thoughts.
23.6    	Except with their wives or their right hand possessed - certainly it is no dishonour.
23.7    	But whoever trespass, they are the aggressors.
23.8    	And they who are keepers of their trusts and their covenants.
23.9    	And they who will fear God in their servitude.
23.10    	They are the inheritors.
23.11    	They shall inherit the Paradise and dwell therein.
23.12    	And verily, We created man from the quintessence of clay.
23.13    	Then We placed him secure, a drop.
23.14    	Then We made it into a cluster of cells; and then, We made it into a lump of flesh; and, We made in it, the bones; then We clothed the bones with muscles - then We made it into a different creation. Allah is the Most Blessed, Creator of Beauty. 
23 15    	Then surely you are to die.
23.16    	Then indeed, on the day of Resurrection, you will be raised.
23.17    	And verily, We have created seven paths above you - and We were never negligent of Our Creations.
23.18    	And We send down water from the sky in just measure and We store it in the earth; and, surely We can take it away.
23.19    	Then therewith, We grow gardens for you of date-palms and grape-vines; in it are innumerable fruits in varieties, whereof ye eat.
23.20    	And the tree that issues of 'Thur-Sinai' grows oil and seasoning for the eaters.
23.21    	Verily in the cattle is a Sign for you; We feed you from their bellies; and, in them are many benefits for you and of them, you eat.
23.22    	And upon them, and on the ships you are borne.
23.23    	And verily We sent Nuh to his people. He said, "O my people, call upon Allah; you have no God other than He; will you then not fear?"
23.24    	Said the leaders of the unbelievers of his people, "He is not any but a man like you; he wants to be praised above you; and had Allah willed He would have sent the angels; We heard not of this, of our fathers before."
23.25    	"He is but bedevilled; so endure him for a period."
23.26    	He said, "O my God, help me for these people bely me."
23.27    	So, We inspired him, "Build a ship before Our eyes by Our Inspiration! Then when comes Our command, and the oven overflows, embark pairs of every livestock in the ship - your family members except upon whom Our word has foregone. And speak not to me about those who were wrongdoers; surely, they will be drowned."
23.28    	When you and those who are with you have settled on the ship, say: "All Glory be to Allah Who saved us from the wicked people!"
23 29    	And say, "Our God, disembark us upon a blessed landing place; surely You are the best to disembark."
23.30    	Certainly in it are the proofs; We are ever putting to the test.
23.31	Then, after them, We brought forth a different generation.
23.32	And from among them We sent a messenger to them. "Call upon Allah; there is no God other than Him; will you then not fear?"
23.33	But the chiefs of the disbelievers of his people; and, those who belied the Last Day; and, those to whom We have given luxury of this world, said: "He is but a mortal like you; he eats what you eat and drinks what you drink."
23.34	"And if you fall to a mortal like you, you will certainly be the losers."
23.35	"Does he surely promise you that you will be certainly brought forth after you die and become dust and bones?"
23.36	"Far away, far away is that which you are promised." 
23.37	"There is no other life other than the life of this world; we shall die and we are alive; and we are not to be raised up again."
23.38	"He is naught but a man who forges about Allah a lie; so we will not believe him."
23.39	He said, "My God, help me for they brand me a liar."
23.40	He said, "In a short span will they be contrite."
23.41	Then a burst did seize them in truth; and We made them into humus; so away with the aggressors.
23.42	Then, after them We brought forth other generations.
23.43	No nation hasten their term, nor do they postpone it.
23.44	After that We kept sending Our messengers; and when each messenger of its community came to them, they belied him; so We made them one after another as 'hadiths - histories'; hence far away is, for those who disbelieve.
23.45	Then We sent Musa and his brother Harun with Our clear Signs and proofs.
23.46	To Firaun and his chieftains: they were a people proud and despotic.
23.47	Then they said, "Are we to believe these two people like us, while their people are our slaves?"
23.48	So they belied them; and they were of those destroyed.
23.49	And verily We gave Musa the Book, that they may be guided.
23.50	And We made the son of Maryam and his mother a Sign; and, We sheltered them on an elevated land of tranquillity with water springs in it.
23.51	"O messengers! Eat of the good things and be righteous; surely I am ever watchful of what you do."
23.52	"And surely you are one human nature; and, I am your God; so fear Me."
23.53	But they got divided in their affairs and each division is satisfied with whatever they have with them.
23.54	So let them enjoy in their ignorance till a term-
23.55	What do they think that We had increased them in luxury and progeny?
23.56	We hasten them in good? Nay, they least reflect!
23.57	Surely, they who fear their God, guarded;
23.58	And they, who trust the Signs of their God;
23.59	And they, who do not set up partners to their God;
23.60	And they, who fear that they are to return to their God and spend to their capacity;
23.61	They are those who hasten to righteousness and who keep advancing.
23.62	And We charge not any soul beyond its scope; and with Us is the witness that speaks the truth, and they shall not be wronged.
23.63	But their hearts are in ignorance about this; and they have jobs other than this, and they indulge.
23.64	Till when We seize those who are indulged in their vanities, with our torment, they will groan, supplicating.
23.65	"Groan not in supplication this day! Assuredly you shall not be helped from Us."
23.66	Indeed My Revelations were recited to you; but you did swirl back on your heels;
23.67	Head haughty, gathering by night, rejected it jesting;
23.68	Then, have they not reflected what has been revealed to them? Or that there has come to them that which came not upon their forefathers?
23.69	Or that they are neglectful and so reject their messenger?
23.70	Or, do they say, "He is bedevilled?" Nay, he has come to them with the Truth; yet most of them are scornful at the Truth.
23.71	And if the Truth had served their vanities, verily, the heavens and on the earth and all in them would have been thrown into chaos; but, We gave them the reflection; yet they reject the very essence of wisdom.
23.72	Or that you have sought wages from them? Excellent is what your God bestows; and He is the Best of Providers.
23.73	And surely you call them to the straight path;
23.74	And those who disbelieve in the Hour has certainly fallen off the course.
23.75	But if We, by Our Mercy, remove their distress, they pursue in their wandering wildly, bewildered.
23.76	And verily, We had seized them with torment; yet, they had not surrendered to their God nor did they show humility.
23.77	Till We opened up on them, the gates of severe chastisement - behold, they lose their hopes therein.
23.78	And it is He who created for you the Hearing, the Sight, the Hearts; little do you use!
23.79	And He made you grow and spread on the earth; and, you will be gathered unto Him.
23.80	And He gives life and causes death; and to Him is the ever changing night and day; will you then not reflect?
23.81	On the contrary, they say as what those before them said.
23.82	They said, "Will we surely be raised again after we are dead and have become dust and bones."
23.83	Surely thus - we and our fore fathers were promised before; this is but a fable of the men of old.
23.84	Say, "If you know, to whom belongs the earth and those on it?"
23.85	They would say, "Allah's!" Say, "Will you not then bring to mind?"
23.86	Say, "Who is the God of the seven heavens and the God of the Glorious Kingdom?"
23.87	They would say, "Allah's!" Say, "Will you not then fear?"
23.88	Say, "In whose hands is the sovereignty? And He protects and no one is protected against Him, if you know"
23.89	They would say, "Allah's!" Say, "Why then do you lose your mind?"
23.90	But We brought them the Truth; yet they are surely liars!
23.91	Allah has not taken unto Himself a son; and, there is no God with Him; if so each God with its creation would try to compete with one another; Allah is most Pure from what they forge.
23.92	He knows what is concealed and what is manifest; so Exalted is He, above what they attribute.
23.93	Say, "My God, if You are to show me what they are promised;-
23.94	"My God, make me not be with the wicked."
23.95	"And surely We are able; We would show you what We promised them."
23.96	Avert the evil with the beautiful response; We know what they describe.
23.97	Say, "My God, I seek refuge in Thee, from the incitements of shaitans."
23.98	"And I seek refuge in Thee. My God, they shall not come near me."
23.99	When the death comes to one of them, he would say, "My God, send me back!"
23.100	"To do the good things I had left behind." Nay! What he says is empty utterance; there is a veil over them until they are raised up.
23.101	So, when the call is given, that day, there will not be any relation between them; and they will not enquire each other.
23.102	The successful are those whose good, measures greater.
23.103	And those whose measure of good is light are they who have lost their souls, in hell abiding.
23.104	The fire would scorch their faces; their looks will be gruesome with their lips drawn away.
23.105	Have not My Signs Revealed to you? Then you turned away.
23.106	They would say, "Our God, our evil has overtaken us and we have become misguided ones."
23.107	"Our God, deliver us out of this! If we turn away again, then surely we are wicked."
23.108	He would say, "Be despised therein; speak not to Me."
23.109	Indeed a section of My servants say, "Our God! We have believed; so Forgive us and grant us Grace; and, You are the Most Gracious of the graceful."
23.110	But you took them in mockery, ridiculing - until you lost Me in your mind.
23.111	This day, surely for their patience, I have rewarded them. Certainly they are victorious.
23.112	He will say, "By count how many years have you tarried on the earth?"
23.113	They will say, "A day, or a part of the day; ask who would know!"
23.114	He will say, "If you know, you tarried only for a short while."
23.115	"Were you to think then, that We created you in vain and that you will not be returned to Us.?"
23.116	So, Allah, the True God is Exalted; there is no God but He. And He is the God of the All Noble Wisdom.
23.117	And He who calls Gods other than Allah, has proof nought; so his account is with his God. Surely, the deniers will not succeed.
23.118	And say, "My God! Forgive and Grace me; for You are the Most Gracious of the graceful."
Chapter 24
The Enlightenment
	
24.1	The Chapter! We bestowed and made it obligatory; and, We have clearly revealed the Sign that you might mind.
24.2	The adulterer and the adulteress - whip each a hundred lashes; show not mercy for them both in what Allah has decreed if you believe in Allah and the Last Day; and to their punishment, let there be a group of believing witnesses.(512)
24.3	An adulterer shall not marry any other than an adulteress, or one who associates with partners; and an adulteress shall not marry any other than an adulterer, or one who associates with partners. This is forbidden for the believers.(513)
24.4	Those who charge chaste women but bring not four witnesses, whip them with eighty lashes; and never ever take them for a witness - for they are evil.(514)
24.5	Except those who repents and reforms - surely, Allah is Ever Forgiving, Merciful.
24.6	Those who charge their wives, yet have no evidence but themselves - they shall say four times, "By Allah surely, I am saying the truth",
24.7	And for the fifth time, "If I lie, may the curse of Allah befall me."
24.8	But it shall avert the punishment from her, if she says four times, "Surely, by Allah, he is of the liars."(515)
24.9	And for the fifth time, "If he is of the truthful, may the wrath of Allah be on me."(516)
24.10	And had there not been Allah's Grace and His Mercy,- Allah is Ever Appreciative of repentance, Most Wise.(517)
24.11	Surely, those who slandered they are a band of you; but think it not as evil to you; nay, it is good for you; each soul has the evil it earned; and, of them who took a major part in it, is a mighty chastisement.(518)
24.12	Why did ye, believing men and women on hearing it, thinking good of their own folk and say, "This is a manifest calumny?"
24.13	Should they not have brought four witnesses? Not having brought the witnesses, they are the liars before Allah.
24.14	And had it not been for the Grace and Mercy of Allah upon you, now and ever, a mighty chastisement would surely have seized you even as you entered into this affair.
24.15	You had taken this slander on your tongue and prattling with your mouths, things of  which you knew naught; and you thought it to be a simple thing; but with Allah it was gruesome.
24.16	And why did you not say when you heard it, "it befits us not to utter on such affairs." "Glory be to You! This is a great calumny?"
24.17	Allah admonishes you shall never resort to the likes of it ever, if you are believers.
24.18	And Allah thus details the Guidance; and Allah is Knowing, Wise.
24.19	Lo! those who desire to spread such lecherous things among the believers, theirs will be a painful doom in this world and in the Hereafter. Allah knows; ye know not.
24.20	And if it had not been for the Grace and Mercy of Allah upon you;- and surely Allah is Merciful, Loving.
24.21	O believers! Follow not shaitan's footsteps; and, whoso follows shaitan's footsteps, he would surely drive him to indecency and abomination; and had it not been for Allah's Grace and Mercy none among you would have ever got purified; yet Allah purifies whom He will - And Allah is Ever-Hearing, All-Knowing.
24.22	And whoso of you is blessed with grace and abundance swear, 'not to give' to the near and the needy; and, to those who have emigrated in the cause of God; let them forgive and overlook. Will ye not wish Allah to forgive your sins? And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
24.23	Verily those who defame decent, innocent, believing women are accursed both in this world and in the Hereafter; and for them is an awful doom.
24.24	On that Day, their tongues, and their hands and their legs will testify against them as to their deeds.
24.25	On that Day, Allah will fully recompense them their reward - and they would know Allah - He is Clear Conscience!
24.26	Vile women for vile men and vile men for vile women; and Pure women for pure men and and Pure men for pure women - they are virtuous and free of all they say; theirs is Forgiveness and Respectable Sustenance.
24.27	O believers! enter not the houses other than your own until the household is free of fear for you and admit you in; that is better for you, that you may mind.
24.28	And if one is not there, enter not in it unless you are allowed in; and if you are asked to leave, turn back; it is pure for you. And Allah is well aware of what you do.
24.29	It is not sin for you if you enter unmanned shelters for necessities; Allah knows what you reveal and what you hide.
24.30	Say to the believing men: Guard thy sight; observe decency - it is best for you. Surely Allah is aware of what they do.
24.31	And say to the believing women: Guard thy sight; observe decency - show not your ornaments except that which naturally shows; and let them cover their bosoms. And make not a show of their ornaments - except before their husbands, their fathers, fathers in law, or their sons, or their husbands' sons, or their brothers; or their brothers' sons; or their sisters' sons; or their women; or their right hand possessed ones; or of the men, the children who have not attained their age but live with them. And let them not desire to show their hidden ornaments by stamping their steps aloud. And O believers! Turn to Allah for success.
24.32	And give in marriage to the spouseless among you, and the righteous of your servants; and if they are in need, Allah by His Bounty, will make them abundant. And Allah is Expansive, Knowing.
24.33	And those who have no means to marry, may they guard decency until Allah enriches them by His Blessings; and, if any of your right-hand possessed seek emancipation - and if you see in them their merit, then write it, and give them of the wealth Allah had bestowed; and concerning the chaste women under your care- force them not into whoredom seeking the cheap enjoyment of this world; and if one forces them, then lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
24.34	And certainly We have sent down clear Signs of Truth, and the examples of those who passed away before you, and an admonition for the God-fearing.
24.35	Allah is the Light for the skies and the earth. The parable of His Light is a niche wherein is a lamp; and, the lamp is in a glass; and, the glass is as it were the radiance of a star, lit by the oil of a blessed tree, belonging to neither the east nor the west; even when it is not touched by the fire, the oil shines; Light upon Light; Allah guides to His Light whom He will. Allah makes plain such examples to mankind; and Allah is All-Encompassing.(519)
24.36	Allah ordains that His Name be most remembered and revered in the houses; and in them they shall uphold His Purity, morn and evening.
24.37	Mankind whom neither trade nor transactions turn them away from the remembrance of Allah; and from surrendering to Him and to give of the pure things, fearing a Day, when their hearts and their eyes will be downcast in despair.
24.38	That Allah may reward for the best of their works and that He shall increase the favour by His grace; and Allah bestows without measure upon whom He will.
24.39	And as for those who reject, their deeds are like a mirage in the desert; the thirsty one feels it to be water till he comes to it  and finds it nothing, but finds Allah; and He settles his due in full; and Allah is swift at reckoning. 
24.40	Or as darkness over darkness in the deep sea - wave upon a wave cover it; and clouds shroud above it, ever deepening the darkness; if he puts out his hand he can hardly see it; and to whoever Allah has not given a Light, he has no Light at all.
24.41	Do you not see - all in the skies and on the earth; and the birds in flight, indeed glorify Allah? Each one knows its way of worship and praising His glory. And Allah is aware of what they do.
24.42	And Allah's is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth; and to Allah is the return.
24.43	Do you not see, Allah ever so lightly draws the cloud and merges them; and then He thickens them into clusters. Then you see the rain bursting out of their clusters; and He sends down hails from the mountains in the skies - He strikes therewith whom He will and averts it from whom He will. And His spark of lightning draws nigh to causing blindness.
24.44	Allah causes the ever changing night and the day; surely herein is the sign for those who reflect.
24.45	And Allah has created every living being from water; of them are those that move on their bellies; and, of them are that walk on their two legs; and, of them are that walk on fours; Allah creates what He will. Surely, Allah has power over all things.
24.46	We have indeed sent down Revelation, clear; and, Allah guides whom He will to the right path.
24.47	And they say, "We believed in Allah and His messenger and we obey; then, after that, a group among them turn away - they are not believers. 
24.48	And if they are called to Allah and His messenger for justice among them, then a party of them turn aside.
24.49	But if the truth is on their side, they come to him with all submission. 
24.50	Do they have disease in their hearts? Or do they suspect? Or do they fear Allah and His messenger would wrong them? Nay, they are the wrong doers.
24.51	When the believers are called  to come to Allah and His messenger to judge between them, all they say is, "We have accepted; we had obeyed." Such are the victorious.
24.52	The victorious are those who obey Allah and His messenger and fear disobedience to Him
24.53	And they say with firmness swearing by Allah, they would go forth if you order them; say, "Do not swear; obedience is well known. Surely Allah is watchful of what you do.
24.54	Say, "Obey Allah and obey the messenger; then, if you turn away, his duty rests upon what is laid on him; and your duty rests upon what is laid on you. So if you obey him, you will be guided; and it is not upon the messenger but to manifest deliverance."
24.55	And Allah's promise is that whosoever of you is believing and righteous will surely be given the authority on the earth as were those given the authority before them; and that He would surely place them firmly in the path chosen for them and that He would  replace their fear with peace. They would not associate partners to Me but they would reflect Me. But whoever disbelieves after that - then those are the sinners.
24.56	And stay firm in His remembrance and give from that which is pure; and obey the messenger - that you shall be shown Mercy.
24.57	And certainly think not that the rejecters would win over on this earth; and their shelter is fire - an evil abode!
24.58	O ye who believe! Of those who are righteous for you and the pre-pubertal innocent children among you shall seek your permission on three occasions: before your reverence at dawn; when you are tired and relaxing during the forenoon and after your reverence at night - the three occasions of privacy for you; this apart, there is no blame on you nor on them - for they are to come to you often, and of you, one to another. Thus Allah explains to you His Wisdom. And Allah is All-Knowing, Most Wise.
24.59	And if, of your children, have attained age, they too shall seek permission as their elders used to do; thus Allah gives wisdom from Him; and Allah is Knower, Wise.
24.60	And no blame on those elderly women who could not opt for marriage when they relax a little, unintentionally; yet, to keep their guard is good for them; and Allah is Hearer, Knower.
24.61	No blame upon the blind, nor upon the handicapped, nor upon the ill, nor in yourselves - that ye may eat separately or all together in your houses and of your fathers, or of your mothers, or of your brothers, or of your sisters, or of your fathers' brothers, or of your fathers' sisters, or of your mothers' brothers, or your mothers' sisters, or in the houses whose keys are in your possession, or in your friends' houses; but into whichever house you enter make lawful to you to greet the household with that which you had received from Allah as most pure and blessed words; thus  Allah makes clear His Signs that you may understand.
24.62	The believers are those who believe in Allah and His messenger; and they would not leave out without his leave when they have assembled on a common interest; surely the true believers in Allah and His messenger are those who leave after seeking your permission; hence if they seek your permission for certain of their affairs give them leave to whom you will; and seek pardon for them from Allah. Surely Allah is Most Forgiving, Merciful.
24.63	Call not your messenger as you wont to call one another among you; Allah indeed knows who of you skulk away; so let those who disobey his order, fear being seized by a trial, severe or, by a painful torment.
24.64	And know that to Allah belongs all that are in the heavens and in the earth; and He knows your state; and on that Day when they will be brought back to Him He will inform them of what you used to do; and Allah is Cognisant  of all things.


Chapter 25
The Distinction

25.1	Blessed is He who sent down the 'Furqaan - the distinguishing' ability, upon His servant that he may be a warner to the worlds.(520)
25.2	It is to Him is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth; and He has not taken a son unto Him; and He has no associate in His Kingdom; and it is He who created everything and proportioned each to a measure.(521)
25.3	But they have taken Gods besides Him which create naught but are themselves created; they possess not harm or good for themselves; and they have no power of life or death, or raising up.
25.4 	And the rejecters say, "It is nothing but a lie he has fabricated and others have helped him in this." So, surely they had brought a lie unjustly.
25.5	And they say, "They are the fables of the old he had written it down - so it is recited before him morn and evening. 
25.6	Say, "It is sent down by Him, who knows the secrets of the skies and the earth. And indeed He is Ever Forgiving, Most Merciful.
25.7	And they say, "What is with this messenger that he eats and walks in the markets; is it not that an angel should have been sent with him as a warner?"
25.8	"Or should he not have been given a treasure? Or a garden to feast from it?" And the unjust say, "You follow no other than a bewitched one."
25.9	See how they set forth parables for you; so they are astray and shall not find a way.
25.10	Blessed is He who can create for you august gardens beneath which rivers flow if He will - and He would create for you palaces of grandeur. 
25.11	Yet, they strive to deny the Hour and We have prepared for those who cry lies to the Hour, a Blaze.
25.12	They will hear the crackling and raging uproar, when it sees them from afar.
25.13	When they are flung into a chink therein chained together, they will cry out for destruction.
25.14	Cry not out for one destruction this day, but call for many destructions.
25.15	Say, "Is that good? Or the infinite paradise promised for the God fearing is good? It will be a goodly reward and a beautiful destination.
25.16	Therein will be all that they wish, dwelling forever; it is on your God a promise, you would pray for.
25.17	On the Day when they and those that they worshiped besides Allah will be gathered, He will say, "Did you mislead My slaves, or they went astray from the way?"
25.18	They will say, "You are Pure! It is not for us to take Protectors beside You; then, You made them and their fathers taste the worldly pleasures; yet they forgot remembering You and became a people ruined." 
25.19	"Surely, they have denied all what you said; so you will not have the strength to avert or to help; and of you who were wicked We will make them suffer a mighty chastisement.
25.20	And We sent not a messenger before you, but indeed, they ate food and walked in the markets; and We have made some of you as a trial unto some others. Will you then be patient? And your God is ever watchful.(522)
25.21	And those who deny their meeting with Us say, "Why the angels have not been sent to us? Or why are we not able to see our God?" Undoubtedly, they are proud and had transgressed!(523)
25.22	The day they see the angels - there is no good news for the sinners on that day; they would say, "Absolutely forbidden."
25 23	And We will turn to their works and will reduce them to motes, scattered.
25.24	That day the people of heavens will have dignified resting place and an environment beautiful.
25.25	And on the day when the sky is cleaved asunder by the clouds, the angels will be sent down in ranks.
25.26	That day the true sovereignty belongs to the Most Benevolent; and to the misbelievers it will be a disastrous day.
25.27	And that day the wicked will bite on his hands and would say, "Alas, would it not be that I had taken to the path with that messenger?"
25.28	And he would say, "Woe to me! Would that I had not taken so-and-so for a friend?" 
25.29	After the remembrance and reminders have come to me for sure, he misled me; ah, shaitan is an open plotter.
25.30	The messenger would say, "My God, surely my people deserted this Quran."
25.31	And thus did We make for each prophet enemies from the wrongdoers; and your God suffices as a Guide and a Helper.
25.32	And the misbelievers say, "Why has this Quran not been sent wholly on a single descent?" We sent this in stages so that your heart is strengthened with it.(524)
25.33	They do not come to you with examples but that We give you in truth, exemplary proof.
25.34	Those who will be gathered in the hell upon their faces, evil is their abode; and by the path most astray.
25.35	And indeed We gave Musa, the Book; and with him, We set his brother Harun as a helper.
25.36	And We said, "Go forth you both to those who denied Our Signs." Then We destroyed them utterly.
25.37	And the people of Nuh: when they belied Our messengers, We drowned them; and We made them a Sign unto the mankind; further, We have prepared  a very painful torment for the unjust.(525)
25.38	And the people of Aad, Samud and the Russ and many a generation between them-
25.39	And to each We gave the Signs of Revelation, clear. We ruined them each.
25.40	And certainly they have gone to a town whereon was rained the evil rain; what, they have not seen it? Yet they believed not in resurrection.
25.41	Is this he, whom Allah has sent as a messenger? When they see you, they take you for mockery.
25.42	He indeed was well-nigh to making us deviate from our Gods had we not been firm to them; they will know who is in far astray in way when they behold the doom. 
25.43	Have you seen he who has taken for god his own lust? Would you then be guardian over him?
25.44	Or deem you that most of them listen or comprehend? They are but as cattle; they are worse astray in path.
25.45	Have you not given a thought to the God how He stretches the shadow? And if He so wish, He would have made it still; and We made the sun a sign unto it.
25.46	Then We retrieve it to Ourselves, gently.
25.47	And He made the night a garment unto you and sleep as a resting for you; and He made the day to rise up.
25.48	And it is He who sends the breezes with glad tidings; and We send down from the sky the purest water.
25.49	We thus give life to the earth, dead; and We give to drink of that We created cattle and men a many. 
25.50	We indeed turned it amongst the men that they may reflect; but most people reject all but disbelief.
25.51	And had We willed We would have sent a warner to every town.
25.52	So follow not the misbelievers; and with this strive against them mightily.
25.53	And He it is who made the two seas meet, one being sweet and delectable and the other salt and detestable; and between the two He had set a bar and a ban forbidden.
25.54	And He it is who created man from clay and made generations and relationships; and your God is All Powerful.
25.55	Yet, they worship other than Allah that which shall neither benefit them nor harm them; and the misbeliever is ever a partisan against his God.
25.56	And We have not sent you as a bringer of good tidings and a warner.
25.57	Say, "I do not ask of you a wage for this except that whoever wills let him take to the path of his God."
25.58	So trust your God who Ever Lasts and whom death does not touch; and Glorify Him with His Purity; and suffices be that He is Aware of His bondsmen's sins.(526)
25.59	He it is who created the heavens and the earth and all in between in six periods and placed Himself upon the throne - the Most Benevolent. So ask of Him from one well informed.
25.60	When said to them, "Surrender to the Most Benevolent," they say, "What is most benevolent? Shall we surrender to that which you command us?" And it only increased aversion in them. 
25.61	Most Blessed is He who created the moving orbits in the sky and placed amidst them the light and the luminous moon.
25.62	And He made the night and the day change into one another to those who desire reflection.
25.63	And the slaves of the Most Benevolent - are those who are modest on the earth; if the ignorant one address them, they will prefer 'salam - peace'. 
25.64	And who pass the night surrendering, being firm in their God's remembrance.
25.65	They would say, "Our God, avert the punishment of hell from us; surely its torment is inseparable."
25.66	Lo! it is wretched as abode and station.
25.67	And who, when they spend, are neither prodigal nor stingy but between that, are just.
25.68	And they will not call on another God beside Allah; nor slay any soul unjustly, which Allah has forbidden, neither fornicate - so whoso do these, invite punishment. 
25.69	On the Eternal Day their punishment will be doubled; they will abide therein despised forever.
25.70	But whoever repents, believes and strives righteous, Allah will change their sins with goodness. And Allah is Ever Forgiving, Most Merciful.
25.71	And whoever repents and reposes in righteousness, has indeed turned to Allah for salvation.
25.72	And they will not testify to falsehood; and when they come upon impiety, they pass by with dignity.
25.73	And when they are recited with their God's Signs, they will not fall thereat deaf and blind.
25.74	They say, "Our God! enliven our eyes of our wives and seed; and make us inspiring to those who are God fearing."
25.75	They will be rewarded magnificent mansions for their patience and will be received with greetings of peace.
25.76	They will abide therein forever - a beautiful one as a place to dwell.
25.77	Say, "Had it not been for your prayers, my God would not have minded you; but you keep rejecting; so soon will be the inevitable."



	      Chapter 26	
		The Poets

26.1	Tha, Seem, Meem, Meem.(527)
26.2	These are the Signs of the Book, clear.
26.3	It may be that you will self destroy for their unbelief.
26.4	If We willed We would have made a Sign from the skies fall on them to bend their necks in abject surrender.
26.5	And no new 'hadiths' - reminders come to them from the Benevolent but to their rejection.
26.6	And surely they strive to deny; yet the news of that which they mock will soon reach them.
26.7	Have they not seen the earth - upon it how many a treasure! We produced them all to pair.(528)
26.8	Verily in this is the Sign - yet, most of them believe not.
26.9	And indeed your God is Mighty, Merciful.
26.10	When your God said to Musa, "Go forth to the aggressors."
26.11	To the people of Firaun, "Will they not fear?"
26.12	He said, "My God, I do fear their rejection of me."
26.13	"My bosom will straiten and my tongue would not move; send Harun too as messenger."
26.14	"And they have a charge against me; I fear they will kill me."
26.15	Said, "Nay! Go you both with Our clear Signs; surely We are with you, Hearing."
26.16	"So go to Firaun and say to him, "Verily We bear a message of the God of the worlds;
26.17	"Send with us the people of Israel!"
26.18	He said, "When you were a child did we not rear you? And were you not with us for years of your life?"
26.19	"So you have done what you did, being one of the ingrates."
26.20	He said, "I did it when I was of those astray."
26.21	"Then when I feared you, I went into safety; then my God had made me of the messengers granting me wisdom."
26.22	Is it a blessing on you to charge me, having enslaved Israelis?
26.23	Firaun said, "What is the God of the worlds?"
26.24	He said, "If you know, He is the God of the heavens and the earth and all in between."
26.25	He said to those about him, "Do you hear it not?"
26.26	He said, "Your God and the God of your first forefathers."
26.27	He said, "Surely the messenger sent to you is mad."
26.28	He said, "If you are discerning, He is the God of the East and the West and what between them is."
26.29	He said, "If you take other than me as God, I will surely make you of the imprisoned."
26.30	He said, "What! Even if l bring you a manifest Proof?"
26.31	He said, "Bring it, if you are truthful!"
26.32	So he cast his staff; it became a serpent, manifest.
26.33	And he drew out his hand and it was white to the beholders.
26.34	And he said to the assembly about him, "He surely is a talented sorcerer!"
26.35	He plans to send you away from your land with his sorcery; then what is your suggestion?
26.36	They said, "Put him and his brother off a while and send into the cities, the gatherers."
26.37	"They will bring unto you every talented sorcerer."
26.38	The sorcerers were assembled at a set time on a day, prescribed.
26.39	The people were asked, "Will you assemble?"
26.40	"For if the sorcerers succeed, we may have to follow them."
26.41	So when the sorcerers came, said to Firaun, "Is there indeed a reward for us if we win?"
26.42	He said, "Yes, indeed then you will be of those close to me."
26.43	Musa said to them: "Cast what you should cast!"
26.44	So they cast their ropes and staves and said, "By the might of Firaun we shall be the victors."
26.45	Then Musa threw his staff, lo! it swallowed up the illusion they created.
26.46	The sorcerers were cast down prostrate.
26.47	Crying, "We believed in the God of the worlds."
26.48	"The God of Musa and Harun."
26.49	Said, "You put your faith in him before I gave you leave; Lo! doubtless it is he who is your chief taught you sorcery; so, soon you will know; verily I will cut off your hands and feet alternately and I shall crucify you all together."
26.50	They said, "No harm! Surely we will only return to our God."
26.51	"We certainly hope, our God will forgive us our sins, as we are first-hand believers."(529)
26.52	And We inspired Musa, "Take away my slaves by night; surely you will be followed!"
26.53	Then Firaun sent into the cities gatherers;
26.54	"Surely these are but a very few;
26.55	"Verily they have enraged us;
26.56	"Assuredly we have been vigilant."
26.57	Thus We did take them away from gardens and springs;
26.58	And treasures and glorious mansions;-(530)
26.59	Thus We bequeathed them upon the descendants of Israel.
26.60	Then they pursued them at sunrise. 
26.61	When the two hosts sighted each other, the companions of Musa said, "We are seized!"
26.62	He said, "No. Surely my God is with me and He would pave the way for me."
26.63	Then We inspired to Musa, "Smite the sea with your staff; and it clave, each part was as a mighty mountain."
26.64	And there We brought near, the others on;
26.65	And We saved Musa and all those with him;
26.66	Then We drowned the others.
26.67	Surely in this is a manifest assurance; yet most of them are not believers.
26.68	Surely your God is  the Mighty, the Merciful.
26.69	And recite to them the life of Ibrahim!
26.70	When he said to his father and his people, "What do you call upon?"
26.71	They said, "We call upon our idols and we remain in their worship."
26.72	Said, "When you call them do they hear you?"
26.73	"Or do they do good to you or harm you?"
26.74	They said, "Nay, but we found our fathers doing so."
26.75	He said, "Then did you see what you had been worshiping?"
26.76	"You and your fathers;
26.77	"These indeed are my enemies - except the God of the worlds;
26.78	"It is He who created me and then guides me;
26.79	"He feeds me and gives me to drink;
26.80	"He cures me when I become ill;
26.81	"And He cause me to die; then He will bring me to life;
26.82	"And I put my trust in His forgiveness of my sins on the Lasting Day."
26.83	"My God! Give me wisdom and make my company with the righteous."
26.84	"And grant me an honourable mention among the latter generations."
26.85	"And make me among the inheritors of the Paradises of Delight!"
26.86	"And forgive my father. Lo! he is of those who err."
26.87	"And put me not to disgrace on the day they are raised up."
26.88	"The day when wealth and sons avail not."
26.89	"Except those who, come to Allah with a serene heart."
26.90	"And Paradise will be brought near to the God fearing."
26.91	"And Hell advanced for the erring."
26.92	And it will be said to them, "Where are those that you worshiped?"
26.93	"But Allah? Will they help you? or help themselves?"
26.94	Then they will be thrown headlong into it - they and the erred.
26.95	Iblis, his forces - all;
26.96	They will dispute among them therein saying,
26.97	"By Allah, we indeed were in open error;
26.98	"When we equated you with the God of the worlds;
26.99	"We are not misguided, but the criminals;
26.100	"So we have no interceder;
26.101	"And not a compassionate friend;
26.102	"if we have a way back, we would be faithful."
26.103	Lo! herein is indeed a Sign - yet, most of them are not believers.
26.104	And your God surely is All-mighty, Merciful.
26.105	And the people of Nuh; they falsified the messengers.
26.106	Their brethren Nuh when said, "Will you not fear God."
26.107	"Verily, I am messenger sent unto you, trustworthy."
26.108	"So fear Allah and obey me."
26.109	"I ask not wages for this; surely, my reward is with the God of the worlds."
26.110	So fear Allah; and follow me.
26.111	They said, "When the despised ones follow you, shall we believe you?"
26.112	He said, "And what knowledge do I have of what they have been doing?"
26.113	"Their account is only with my God, were you but aware."
26.114	"And I will not drive away the believers."
26.115	"I am naught but a plain warner."
26.116	They said, "If you do not stay clear, surely you will be one of the stoned."
26.117	He said, "My God, surely my people have belied me."
26.118	"So judge between me and them in truth and save me and the believers with me."
26.119	So We saved him and those who were with him in the laden ship.
26.120	Then We drowned the rest;
26.121	Surely in this is a Sign; yet most of them do not believe.
26.122	Surely your God is Mighty, Merciful.
26.123	Aad - belied the messengers;-
26.124	When their brethren Hud said to them, "Will you not fear?"
26.125	"Surely I am your messenger, trustworthy."
26.126	"So fear Allah; and follow me."
26.127	"And I ask of you no wages for this; my wage is not but with the God of the worlds."
26.128	"Do you erect vain monuments on every high ground?"
26.129	"And do you build mansions, enduring?"
26.130	"And when you seize, you seize as a cruel one."
26.131	"So fear Allah; and follow me."
26.132	"And fear He Whom ye knew has succoured ye,"
26.133	"Succoured ye with flocks and folks."
26.134	"And gardens and springs."
26.135	"Surely I fear for you the retribution of an awful day."
26.136	They said, "Alike it is to us whether you admonish or not of the admonishers."
26.137	"This is but a habit of the men of old.
26.138	"And we shall not be doomed."
26.139	They belied him; so We destroyed them; surely herein is a Sign; yet most of them do not believe."
26.140	And surely your God is Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.
26.141	Samud - belied the messengers;
26.142	When Salih said to his brethren, "Will ye not fear?"
26.143	"Surely I am a messenger, trustworthy to you."
26.144	"So fear Allah, and follow me."
26.145	"And I ask of you no wages for this; my wage is not but with the God of the worlds."
26.146	"Will ye be left in this here, without your fear?"
26.147	"In gardens and springs?"
26.148	"And in the cornfields and palms with slender spadices?"
26.149	"And you hew out houses in the mountains, being skilful!"
26.150	"So fear Allah, and follow me."
26.151	"And bow not to the bidding of the prodigals."(531)
26.152	"They cause corruption in the land and set not things aright."
26.153	"They said, "You are only of the bewitched."
26.154	"You are naught but a mortal, like us; so, if you are truthful, bring us a Sign."
26.155	He said, "Here is a she-camel; she has its turn of drinking; and you will get your turn of the catchment."
26.156	And harm it not with any intent lest the torment of an awful day will seize you. 
26.157	But then they hamstrung her; then they were remorseful.
26.158	So the torment seized them - herein is a sure Sign; yet most of them do not believe.
26.159	And indeed your God is Mighty, Merciful.
26.160	The people of Lut belied the messengers;
26.161	When their brother Lut said to them, "Will you not fear Allah?"
26.162	"I am indeed to you a messenger, trustworthy."
26.163	"So fear Allah and follow me."
26.164	"And I ask of you no wages for this; my wage is not but with the God of the worlds."
26.165	"Do you lust for males in the world?"
26.166	"Leaving your wives God has created for you? Nay, ye are a people transgressing."
26.167	They said, "O Lut! if you do not step aside, you will be surely be of those evicted."
26.168	He said, "I am truly a detester of what you do."
26.169	"My God, deliver me and my family from what these people do."
26.170	Thus did We deliver him and his family all together.
26.171	Except the old lady who stayed behind-
26.172	Then We destroyed others.
26.173	Then We made rain of evil pour on them; it was an awful rain upon the warned.
26.174	Indeed herein is a Sign; yet most of them do not believe.
26.175	And your God is surely Mighty, Merciful.
26.176	The people of the thicket belied the messengers;
26.177	When Shuaib said to them, "Will you not fear Allah?"
26.178	"I am indeed to you a messenger, trustworthy;"
26.179	"So fear Allah, and follow me."
26.180	"And I ask of you no wages for this; my wage is not but with the God of the worlds."
26.181	"Measure in full; lessen it not."
26.182	"And measure justly."
26.183	"And deprive not people their due and move not about the earth causing corruption."
26.184	"And fear He who created you and that were before you."
26.185	They said, "You are merely of those that are bewitched."
26.186	"You are naught but a man like us; indeed we regard you of the liars."
26.187	"So if you are truthful, make a piece of the sky fall on us."
26.188	He said, "My God knows well what ye do."
26.189	Then they belied him; so the torment of the day of black clouds overwhelmed them; it was indeed the punishment of a ghastly day.
26.190	Surely herein is a Sign; yet most of them do not believe.
26.191	And surely your God is Mighty, Merciful.
26.192	And surely it is sent down by the God of the worlds.
26.193	The trustworthy soul descended with it.
26.194	Upon your heart - haply you might be a warner. 
26.195	Clearly, in Arabic.
26.196	Surely it is from the time of the descent of the Scriptures.
26.197	Is it not then a Sign for them that the learned among the descendants of Israel knew this?
26.198	And if We had sent it down on one whose tongue is not Arabic,
26.199	And even if he had recited this to them, they would not have been believers in it.
26.200	Thus do We push into the hearts of the wicked.
26.201	They will not believe in it until they behold the painful punishment.
26.202	So it will come to them suddenly when they are unaware.
26.203	They will ask, "Will we be respited?"
26.204	"Do they seek to hasten Our Punishment?"
26.205	Do not you see even if We allowed them, long happy years;
26.206	Then there comes to them what they were promised;
26.207	Then the happy days they had lived avail them naught.
26.208	And We destroyed not a city except that it had warners.
26.209	As a reminder; and We were not unjust.
26.210	And not the shaitans brought it down.
26.211	And it befits them not; neither are they able. 
26.212	Verily, they are banished from hearing this.
26.213	So call not god besides Allah; lest you will be one of the chastised.
26.214	And warn those who are dear to you.
26.215	And lower thy wing to those believing followers.
26.216	But if they disobey you, then say, "I am quit of that you do."
26.217	And put your trust in the Mighty, the Merciful.
26.218	And He Sees when you are steadfast.
26.219	And your being with those who are humble.
26.220	Surely He is Hearing, Knowing.
26.221	Shall I tell you upon whom the shaitans descend?
26.222	They descend upon every sinful liar.
26.223	They give ear, but most of them are liars.
26.224	And the poets; only the erring follow them.
26.225	Have not you seen them, how they wander in every valley?
26.226	And surely they say that they do not do.
26.227	But except those who believe and stay righteous, revering Allah and avenge the unjust - and the unjust would surely know where they are to return.

Chapter 27
The Ants

27.1	Tha Seen@ - These letters are the Proofs of Quran, the clear Book.(532)
27.2	As guidance and glad tiding to the believers.
27.3	They obey God and spend with pure heart and sure of the Hereafter. 
27.4	Surely to those who do not believe in the Lasting life, We made their works seem fair to them; so they wander wild.
27.5	For such of them is an evil punishment; and in their Lasting life, they will be the greatest losers.
27.6	Surely, you receive this Quran from One, All-Wise, All-Knowing.
27.7	When Musa said to his folks, "I certainly see a fire; I will bring you information from there; or I will bring a flaming brand, haply you shall warm yourselves."
27.8	So when Musa came to it he was called and said, "Blessed are those who are upon the Light and those who surround it; and Most Pure is Allah, the God of the worlds."
27.9	"O Musa, behold, it is I, Allah, All-Mighty, All-Wise.
27.10	"Cast down your staff!" But when he saw it as a creeping snake, he turned back and flee headlong. "Musa, fear not! surely the messengers fear not in My presence."
27.11	Except he who caused evil, - yet, I am indeed Most Forgiving, Most Merciful if he changes his evil to righteousness.
27.12	And put your hand into your bosom and take it out; it will come out spotless-white; it is of the nine signs to the Firaun and his people; they are indeed evil-living people.
27.13	Thus when Our manifest signs came to them, they said: "This is plain sorcery!"
27.14	And though their hearts knew it is true, they rejected it with pride, unjustly. Lo, and behold! what an evil end for the wicked.
27.15	And assuredly We gave wisdom to Dawood and Sulaiman; they both said, "All Praise be to Allah; it is He who raised us above most of the believing servants." 
27.16	And Sulaiman became Dawood's heir; he said, "O men! We have been taught birds' language; and we have been given of everything; it indeed is a blessing, evident."
27.17	And for Sulaiman, forces from the jinns, men and the birds were gathered and set in ranks;
27.18	Until when they came close to the valley of anthill an ant said, "O Ants! enter your houses lest Sulaiman and his army crush you, being unaware."
27.19	Then he smiled at its saying, and said, "My God, help me with wisdom that I shall show gratitude to Thee for bestowing Thy grace upon me and upon my parents; and to do righteousness to Thy pleasure. And by Thy mercy join me with those of Thy righteous servants."
27.20	And as he inspected the birds, he said, "I do not see 'hudh-hudh' - any reason? Or is he among the absent?"
27.21	"Surely I will punish him with a severe punishment; or I will slay him; or he should bring me a clear evidence."
27.22	He had not waited for long; then he said, "I have come upon a thing that you have not apprehended; I have brought to you a sure tiding from Saba."
27.23	"Surely I saw a woman ruling them and she has been given everything; and she possesses a grand throne.
27.24	"And I found her and her people submitting to the sun apart from Allah; shaitan had made their work pleasing to them and had hindered them from the path of Allah; so  they are not in the straight path."
27.25	"That! they do not submit wholly to Allah, Who brings forth the hidden in the skies and in the earth and Who knows what you hide and what you proclaim?"
27.26	"There is no God but Allah; the God of the Exalted Throne."
27.27	He said, "Do you say the truth? or are you of the liars? We will soon know."
27.28	"Take this, my edict and drop it before them; then withdraw from them to see what they return."
27.29	Said she, "O Assembly! A dignified letter has been delivered to me."(533)
27.30 	"Indeed it has come from Sulaiman; and surely it is, "In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, Merciful."
27.31	"Show not your pride before me; come to me surrendering."
27.32	She said, "So, O Assembly! Put forth your suggestion in my affair, this; I have never decided my affairs except in your presence."(534)
27.33	They said, "We are mighty and a fierce force and the command is yours; so consider what you will command."(535)
27.34	She said, "If the kings enter a nation, surely they ruin it and demean its dignified ones; and thus too will they do."(536)
27.35	"So I will certainly send goodwill to them and see with what the emissaries return."
27.36	Thus when they came to Sulaiman, he said, "Help ye me with the things? What Allah has bestowed me with is better than what He has provided you; yet, it is you who are pleased in your gift."
27.37	Go ye back to them! Surely we will come to them with a force they cannot withstand; we will drive them out therefrom, disgraced; and they will be abased."
27.38	Said, "O assembly! Which of you will bring me her throne before they come unto me submitting."
27.39	Among the Jinn, Ifrith said, "I will bring it to you before you rise from your seat; I am indeed powerful for it, and trustworthy."
27.40	Said he who possessed the wisdom of the Book, "I will bring it to you before thy glance returns unto thee." And seeing it placed before him, he said, "This is blessing from my God, to test me if I am thankful or I am thankless; whoever is thankful, to him is his thankfulness; and whoever is thankless, then indeed my God is Needless, Noble."
27.41	He said, "Duplicate her throne; let us see if she is guided or she is of those, unguided."(537)
27.42	So when she came it was said to her, "Is your throne like this?" She said, "It is like it!" And we were given the wisdom before her, and we are a people for peace, 'Muslims'."
27.43	And what averted her was that which she was worshiping other than Allah; she is indeed of the people who disbelieved.(538)
27.44	It was said to her, "Enter the palace!" When she saw it, she thought it to be a virginal pool and she bared her upto her shins. He said, "It is indeed a palace built of brightly transparent glass." She said, "My God! I had indeed wronged my own soul; I am a Muslim unto Allah, the God of the worlds, with Sulaiman."
27.45	And certainly We sent to the people of Samud, their brother Salih that 'they call unto Allah'. But there they were, divided disputing.
27.46	He said, "O my people, why do you seek to hasten evil before good? And why do not you seek forgiveness of Allah that you might be blessed?"
27.47	They said, "We consider you and those with you as evil omen. He said, "Your evil omen is with Allah; yet you are a people on trial."
27.48	And in the city were nine men who were spreading corruption in the land without doing any good."(539)
27.49	They said, "We will swear by Allah that we certainly destroy him and his family by night. Then we shall certainly say to his heir, 'we did not witness your family's destruction and surely we are truthful'."  	
27.50	They plotted a plot; and We planned a plan without their knowing.(540)
27.51	See then how was the end of their plot; We ruined them and their entire population.(541)
27.52	See, yonder are their houses ruined, because they wronged; surely herein is the sign for those who know.
27.53	And We saved those who were faithful and feared God. 
27.54	And Lut - to his people said, "Do you behave lewdly while you see?"
27.55	Do you approach men in preference to women, with lust? Ye are a people utterly ignorant."
27.56	His people had no answer except that they said, "Drive Lut's family out of your city; they are indeed too pure!"
27.57	But We delivered him and his family, except his wife; We decided she should be of those who stayed behind.
27.58	And We rained upon them an incessant downpour; and evil was that rain of them who  were warned.
27.59	Say, "All Praise be unto Allah; and may peace be upon His servants whom He had chosen! Is Allah best? Or what they associate?
27.60	Who created the heavens and the earth and brings down pure water from the sky? Therewith We create lush green pastures and gardens; you cannot make its trees grow; so, is there God with Allah? Nay. Yet, they are a people who associate.
27.61	Who made this world a place of dwelling and made the rivers flowing through it and the mountains for it; and caused a barrier between the two seas? Is there a God with Allah? Nay, most of them have no knowledge. 
27.62	Who answers and removes your distress when you call Him in plight and made you successors in the land? Is there a God with Allah? Yet, you give little thought.
27.63	Who guides you in the darkness of the land and the sea and who sends you the breeze with good tidings before His Mercy? Is there a God with Allah? High Exalted be Allah from that they associate.
27.64	Who begins the creation and then creates it again? Who provides you from the sky and the earth? Is there a God with Allah? Say: "Bring your proofs if you speak truly.
27.65	Say: But Allah no one in the heavens and in the earth knows the secrecies and they know not when they will be raised.
27.66	Yet, very low is their knowledge about their end; they are in doubt thereunto; nay, they are blind to it.
27.67	And the disbelievers say, "What! we and our forefathers will really be brought back after we are dust?"
27.68	"We were promised this, forsooth, we and our fathers before; this is not any other than ancient-tales."
27.69	Say, "Travel about the earth and behold what was the end of the wicked."
27.70	And grieve not for them nor be you straitened for what they conspire.
27.71	And they say, "When is your promise, if you are truthful?"
27.72	Say, "Some of what you hasten on may be close behind you."
27.73	And your God indeed is bountiful to mankind; but most of them are thankless.
27.74	And your God surely knows what they hide in their breasts and what they declare.
27.75	And nothing is hidden in the heavens and the earth, but it is in the Book, clear.
27.76	Surely this Quran reveals to the descendants of Israel most of that concerning which they dispute.
27.77	And in it surely is the guidance and a mercy unto the believers.
27.78	Surely your God will judge between them by His Judgment - He is the Mighty, the Knowing.
27.79	So rely upon Allah; you are indeed upon the clear truth.
27.80	Surely you can not make the dead hear; even thus you cannot make the deaf hear the call when they turn away, retreating.
27.81	And you cannot guide the blind from their error - surely you can make none to hear except those who believe in Our Signs, for they submit to peace.
27.82	When their Promise befalls them We will bring forth for them a creature from the earth; it will surely speak to man that they had not believed in Our Signs. (542)
27.83	And upon the day when we shall muster out of every nation the deniers of Our Signs as a force, duly disposed;-
27.84	Until, - when they come, He will say, "Were you denying My Signs while you could not encompass them? What were you doing?"
27.85	And because of their evil doings, the Word has come to pass; so they will not speak.
27.86	Do not they see, verily, We cause the night - that they may rest therein; and the day - that they may see; in it are the Signs for those who believe.
27.87	And the Day when the Word will be blown! Except those whom Allah saved everyone in the skies and the earth would be terrified. And all come unto Him, humbled.
27.88	And seeing the mountains, you deem them strong; they will fly like clouds- by the might of Allah, who strengthened everything. Verily He is All Aware of what you do.
27.89	Whoever brings good, will have better than that; and they will be free from fear that day.
27.90	And whoever brings evil, he will be flung headlong into fire - will ye be rewarded except for what you used to do?
27.91	I am only commanded to call Him who has made this city dignified; all things belong to Him; and I am commanded to be in peace with Him.
27.92	And I bring Quran to you - whoever takes to guidance it is for his good; and whoever strays away, then say, "I am only of the warner."
27.93	And say, "All Praise be unto Allah! Very soon He will reveal His Signs to you; then you will know them; and your God is not neglectful of what you do.

Chapter 28
The Histories

28.1	Tha, Seen, Meem(543)
28.2	These are the Signs of the clear Book.
28.3	We bring to you for the people of faith, in truth, of the events from the lives of Musa and Firaun.(544)
28.4	Verily Firaun exalted himself on the earth, dividing the people on the land into sections and abased a group of them; he slaughtered their menfolks and let live their womenfolks; surely he was among the wicked.
28.5	Yet, We willed to bestow Our Favour upon the abased, make them leaders and the heirs.(545)
28.6	And to establish them in the land and to show the forces of Firaun and Haman what they were dreading from them;-
28.7	We Inspired the mother of Musa, "Nurse him; if you fear, leave him in the river; thereafter fear not and grieve not. Surely We will return him unto you and will make him among the messengers."(546)
28.8	Firaun's folks took him, that he shall become an enemy and a grief to them; verily Firaun and Haman and their forces were wrong doers.
28.9	And Firaun's wife said, "He is refreshing to the eyes- to me and to you; kill him not; he may be a good tiding for us or we will take him for a son" - but they were not to know.
28.10	The heart of Musa's mother became desolated; she well nigh disclosed him had we not strengthened her heart, that she might be of the believers.
28.11	And she said to his sister, "Follow him." She kept her watch on him from a distance, without anyone noticing her."
28.12	And We had stopped him from suckling before. Said, "Shall I inform you of a family who would rear him for you and take care of him?"
28.13	Thus, that it refreshes the eyes of his mother and that she might not grieve; and that she may know Allah's word is true, We restored him to his mother - but most of them know not.
28.14	And when he reached full age and was ripe We gave him judgment and wisdom - thus do We reward the good-doers.
28.15	He entered the city when the people retired; there he saw two men fighting. One was of his caste and the other was of his enemy; the one who was of his caste cried out for help against the enemy. Musa with a blow finished him; he said, "This is the work of shaitan; surely he is an enemy in manifest error."
28.16	He cried out, "My God! I have certainly wronged myself; so forgive me!" Then He forgave him; surely He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
28.17	He said, "My God! As You have favoured me, I will nevermore be a helper to the criminals."
28.18	And in the morning when he was observing the city with fear, the one who cried out to him the day before, cried out to him again. Musa said, "You are indeed an impetuous."
28.19	Then Musa when lunged forward to catch their enemy, he said, "Musa! are you going to kill me as you killed a man yesterday? You always prefer wrong doing and you are not of the peace making."
28.20	Then a man from a remote corner came running said, "O Musa! Surely the chieftains jointly conspire to kill you; so exit! Surely I am one of your sincere advisers."	
28.21	So with fear, he carefully left the city. He said, "My God! Save me from these wrong doers."
28.22	And when he came to Madhyan, he said, "It is that my God shall guide me aright." 
28.23	And when he came to the water of Madhyan0, there he saw a group of people watering; apart from them he found two girls holding back their flocks. He said, "What is you need here?" They said, "Until these shepherds drive away we cannot draw water - and we have very old father."
28.24	So he watered for them; then he turned back to the shade and said, "My God! I am indeed in need of whatever good you would send down for me."
28.25	Later, of the two girls one came before Musa with hesitation and said, "My father invites you to give you the wage for having watered for us." Thus when Musa came to him, he narrated his situation. He said, "Fear not. You have escaped from the wrong doing nation." 
28.26	Of the two girls one said, "Father, hire him; surely he is the best whom you would hire; he is strong, trusty." 
28.27	He said, "Upon that you shall serve me for eight years, I certainly wish one of these, my daughters weds you - but if you could complete ten, that is your wish; I intend not strait to you; if Allah will you would see me of the good."(547)
28.28	He said, "This is the condition between you and me; there is no blame to me, of the two terms whichever I complete; and Allah is surety over what we say.
28.29	Thus when Musa was journeying with his family completing the term, he saw a flash by the 'Thur' and said to his folks, "Surely I see a torch; I will bring you a news from there or a burning firebrand that you may warm yourselves."
28.30	So when he came to it, in a blessed place on the right side of the valley, from a tree a voice called and said: "O Musa! I am indeed Allah, God of the worlds."(548)
28.31	"Throw down your staff!" When he saw it becoming a serpent creeping, turning away he fled headlong. "O Musa! Come forward; and fear not; surely you are of the secured."
28.32	"Push your hand into your pocket and it will come out pure white; and when you fear push your hands into your sides. These are the two Signs meant for Firaun and his chieftains from your God. Surely they are a people sinning."
28.33	He said, "My God! verily I had killed one of them; so I fear they might kill me."
28.34	And my brother Harun! He is clearer in communication than me and so send him with me as a helper to confirm me; surely I fear they will cry me lies."
28.35	Said He, "We will strengthen your arms with your brother and will give you both the power so they cannot touch you; you two, and those who followed you will exalt over them by Our Signs."
28.36	So when Musa came to them with Our clear Signs, they said: "This is no other than a magical tale and we had not heard of this of our ancients."
28.37	Musa said, "My God knows who is of His guidance and whose stable is stable. Verily the wicked will not succeed."
28.38	And Firaun said, "O Chiefs! But for me I know not there is a God for you; O Haman! Raise a tower upon the baked clay; so I shall mount and see Musa's God; and I deem him of the liars!"
28.39	And he and his forces were unjustly arrogant in the land; and they deemed they would not be brought back to us.
28.40	So we seized him and his forces and cast them into the sea; behold, what a tragedy to the transgressors.
28.41	And We made them leaders taking them to fire; and they will not be helped on the lasting day.
28.42	And in this world we made curse to pursue them who on the Judgment Day will be of the condemned. 
28.43	And after We had destroyed the ancient generations, We indeed gave Musa the Book with wisdom, guidance and mercy - that man shall reflect.
28.44	But when We gave Our Commandments to Musa, you were not by Us, nor were you a witness.
28.45	And We raised up generation upon whom the times have passed; and you were not a dweller amidst Madhyan, reciting to them Our Signs; yet We were senders.
28.46	And you weren't  by the Thur when We called; yet, those to whom We had not sent a warner - as a warning, a grace from your God that they might heed. 
28.47	When an affliction touches them because of what their hands have forwarded, and that they shall not say: "Our God! Is it not that you had sent a messenger upon us? Then We would have abode by Your Signs and been of the believers."
28.48	Yet, when the Truth from Us came to them, they say: "Why was he not given as that what Musa was given?" What! did they not reject what Musa was given before? And they say, "Two magics, supporting each other; surely we reject everything."(549)
28.49	So say, "If you are truthful, bring from Allah that which gives better guidance than these that I may follow it."
28.50	If they do not answer you, know that they follow their desires. And who is more astray than he who follows his desires without the directions from Allah? Surely Allah will not guide the transgressing people.
28.51	And that they may give heed We kept sending them the word.
28.52	Those to whom We had given the Book before it, they believe in this.(550)
28.53	And when Our Signs are recited to them they say: "We believe this. Verily this is the Truth from Our God and we were ever at peace with this before."
28.54	They will be rewarded twice for their patience; and they repel evil with good and expend from what We have provided them.
28.55	And when they hear vain talks, they slight and say, "To us our deeds and to you your deeds; may peace be upon you! We desire not those who pass off."
28.56	You cannot guide whom you like but Allah guides whom He will. And He knows who befits guidance.
28.57	And they say, "If we were to follow the straight path with you, we would be thrown out of our land." Have We not settled them in a sure sanctuary whereunto was brought the fruits of all kinds, as a provision from Us? But most of them know not.
28.58	How many a nation have We destroyed because of their froward transgression; all these were the places where they dwelled; and after them none lived there but for a while. Then, it is We, the inheritors.
28 .59	And your God never destroys a nation until a messenger with Our Sings is sent to their capital; and We destroy not a nation save when its people were evil.
28.60	And whatever things you were allowed is the fun and glamour of this world; but what is with Allah is, infinitely exalting; will you then not know?
28.61	Is the one, to whom We have given from Us a fair promise, unfailing, equal to him to whom We have allowed the meanest pleasure of this world, to be seized in the end?
28.62	And on the Day when they are called, he would say, "Where are they whom you deemed as associates to Me?"
28.63	Those upon whom the pronouncement is made would say, "Our God, these are they whom we led astray; we led them astray even as we ourselves were astray - and we declare to You, our innocence; they were not worshiping us."
28.64	And it will be said: "Call your associates!" They will call them; but they will not answer them; and they will see their torment. Lo! if only were they righteous!
28.65	And on the Day of their call He will ask: "With what did you answer your messengers?"
28.66	But on the Day, all their affairs will be closed; neither will they ask one of another.
28.67	But whoso reforms, believes and behaves, they are of the guided.
28.68	And your God creates what He intends and chooses; choice is not theirs. Allah is Most Pure and Exalted be He, from what they associate.
28.69	And your God knows well what their breasts conceal and what they publish.
28.70	And He is Allah, there is no God but He. Glory be unto Him before and ever; His is the authority of Justice; and you will be returned unto Him.
28.71	Say: "Think ye, if Allah were to make night permanent over you to the last day, Who is the God beside Allah who will bring you light? Will you not hear?" 
28.72	Say: "Think ye, if Allah were to make day permanent over you to the last day, who is the God beside Allah will bring you night to rest therein? Will you not see?"
28.73	And He by His Mercy made night and day for you that you may rest therein and to seek His Grace; so be grateful!
28.74	And He would ask on the day of calling, "Where are My associates whom you deemed?"
28.75	And We, while keeping witness from each nation, will say, "Bring your proof!" Then they will know, 'The Truth belongs to Allah' - and all that they forged will vanish.
28.76	Surely Qaroon belonged to Musa's community; yet he committed atrocities against them. We had given him treasures - and verily, its keys were heavier even to the heaviest. Then their people said to him, "Be not proud; Allah likes not the proud."
28.77	"And seek eternal house from what Allah has given you and do not forget your portion of the world; do good as Allah had done good to you and desire not corruption in the land; surely Allah loves not the corrupters."
28.78	Said he, "I am endowed this because of my certain knowledge." Did he not know that Allah had destroyed those who were even stronger and more abundant in possession than he? But the guilty will not be asked about their sins."
28.79	Then he went before the people in his pomp; those who loved this world said, "Ah, would that we had the like of what was given to Qaroon? Surely he is lord, mightily blessed!"
28.80	Those who were given the true knowledge said, "Woe upon you, the reward of Allah is better if you believe and stay righteous; yet none shall attain it except who is patient."
28.81	So We caused the earth to swallow Qaroon and his house and there was no host to help him against Allah; and he was helpless to himself.
28.82	Those who longed to be in his place the day before said, "Ah, Allah increases provisions to whom He Will of his servants and reduces in measure; had Allah not shown us Mercy, He would have made us to be swallowed too. Ah, the unbelievers will not prosper."
28.83	We will reward the eternal home only to those who would not exalt and spread not corruption in the land; beautiful end is only for the God fearing.
28.84	Whoever brings good, for him is better than that and whoever does evil the evil doers will not be punished but for that they used to do.
28.85	Verily He who hath ordained this Quran upon you shall again return you to the blessed place. Say, "My God is Well-Aware who has brought righteousness with him.
28.86	And you did not expect the Book would be revealed to you except by the Mercy of  your God. So be not a supporter for the unbelievers.
28.87	And let not anything deviate you away after the Signs from Allah has reached you; and call to your God and become not of the associators.
28.88	Follow not a god besides Allah; there is no god but He; and all things vanish except His Guidance. His is the Judgment. And unto Him you shall be returned.

Chapter 29
The Spider

29.1	Alif Laam Meem (551)
29.2	Do the men think they will be left to say 'we believe', and will not be tried?
29.3	Surely We tried those before them - verily Allah knows the truthful and knows certainly the liars.
29.4	Or, is it that the unjust think, they would escape us? Ill, they judge.
29.5	Whoever believes his meeting with Allah, surely Allah's Hour is coming; He is Hearing, Knowing.
29.6	And whoever strives, indeed strives for himself; lo! Allah is needless of all creations.
29.7	So, those who believe and stay righteous, We will surely remove their evil from them; and We will surely recompense them with a reward greater than their due.
29.8	We enjoined upon man kindness to his parents; and do not obey them if they force you to set up partners to Me that whereof you have no knowledge;  unto Me is your return and I will inform you of what you used to do.
29.9	And those who believe and stay righteous, We will surely join them with the righteous.
29.10	And of the people is he who says, "We believe in Allah; but if a trial touches them in Allah's path, they take it as the punishment of Allah while it is caused by the men. But when Allah's help comes to them, they say, "Surely we were with you! Does not Allah know what is in the breasts of the people of the worlds?"
29.11	And Allah does know the believers and Allah knows the hypocrites.(552)
29.12	And the disbelievers say to the believers, "Follow our way; we shall bear your sins." "But they are not the bearers of their own sins; they are indeed, liars."(553)
29.13	They shall bear their burden and bear the burden upon their burden; and they shall be surely questioned on the lasting day concerning that they forged.
29.14	And We certainly sent Nuh to his people who tarried amidst them fifty short of a thousand years; but the flood engulfed them while they were wrong doers.
29.15	But We saved him and those who were in the ark and We made it a Sign for the inhabitants of the world.
29.16	And Ibrahim, when he said to his people: "Call upon Allah and fear Him; that is better for you, did you know.
29.17	You worship the idols but Allah; and you only invent a lie; surely, save Allah, none that you worship shall avail you aught; so turn to Allah for your needs; call only on Him and be faithful to Him; and unto Him ye shall be returned.
29.18	And if you cry lies, those before you cried lies too; so upon the messenger is not but to deliver, clear.
29.19	Do not you think how Allah begins creation and creates again? Verily, it is easy to Allah.
29.20	Say, "Journey through the earth and behold how He causes a creation to begin and how Allah originates the latter creations; verily Allah is Able over all things."	(554)
29.21	He punishes whom He will and graces whom He will - and you will be returned unto Him.
29.22	And you shall not over rule the earth or the sky; and neither you have a protector nor a helper other than Allah.
29.23	And whoever rejects the Signs of Allah and meeting with Him are they who are despaired about My Grace. And for them is a painful torment.
29.24	The only answer of his people were but this: 'Kill him or burn him'. But Allah saved him from the fire; surely in it are the Signs for the believers.
29.25	And said, "You have taken for worshiping other than Allah because of your love among yourselves in this world; then on the day of reckoning, you will reject each other and curse one another; and your refuge is fire; and you shall have no helpers."
29.26	Lut believed in him and said: "I will leave my livelihood for my God's sake. Surely He is the Mighty, the Wise."
29.27  	And We gave him Ishaq and Yaqub and We gave their descendants prophecies and wisdom; and We gave his reward in this world; surely in the hereafter he will be among the righteous.
29.28	And Lut, said to his people: "You have indeed dared exhibiting such abhorrence that none in the world has ever exhibited before you."(555)
29.29	He said, "What! ye approach men? And cut the way; and you behave with moral looseness in your assemblies. The answer of his people was nothing but to say, "Bring upon us the doom of Allah if you are a truth sayer."
29.30	Then he said, "My God! Help me against the corrupting people."
29.31	When Our messengers came to Ibrahim with good news, they said, "Surely we are destroyers of that city for they truly are sinners."(556)
29.32	He said, "Lo! Lut is in it." They said, "We know very well who is in it; so we shall surely deliver him and his family except his wife; she will be of those who tarry."
29.33	And when Our messengers came to Lut, he was sad for them and was distressed on their account. They said, "Fear not, worry neither; we shall surely deliver you and your family except your wife; she will be of those who tarry."
29.34	"We indeed will bring down the torment from the sky upon the people of the town for the evil they do."(557)
29.35	And for the knowing, We have certainly left in this a Sign, manifest.
29.36	And to Madhyan We sent their brother, Shuaib. He said, "O my people! Call only upon Allah and rely on him till the last day; and stray not in the earth spreading evil."
29.37	But they denied him; so earthquake seized them and the morning found them prone dead in their homes.
29.38	And the Aad and Samud; and they are clear to you from their dwellings; because shaitan made their works fair seeming to them and barred them from their straight path, while they know well.
29.39	And Qarun, and Firaun and Haman: Musa indeed came to them with clear Signs. Yet, they were arrogant on the earth and they could not escape.
29.40	Thus we seized each one by the account of their sins individually; upon some We sent the hail storm; and the blast seized some; and some were buried, and some others did We drown. Allah wronged them not but they wronged themselves.
29.41	The parable of those who take other protectors than Allah is as that of a spider who built a house - surely the frailest of houses is the house of a spider, if only they knew. 
29.42	Surely Allah knows whichever they call upon besides Him; and He is the Mighty, the Wise.
29.43	Thus We expound similes for mankind but none will receive it save those who remember.
29.44	Allah has created the heavens and the earth in truth; in it indeed, is the Sign for the believers.
29.45	Make clear what is revealed to you of the Book, and stand firm. Surely standing firm by the command of Allah shall avert the indecencies and evil; certainly greater is Allah's remembrance; and Allah is aware of what you do.
29 46	And argue not with the transgressors save with justness with the people of the Book, who say: "We believe in what is revealed to us and what is revealed to you; and, our God and your God is One; and we are in peace, surrendering to Him."(558)
29.47	And thus, We have sent down to you the Book; so those to whom We have given the Book, they believe in it; and there are such who believe in it - and none would reject Our Signs but the unbelievers.
29.48	And you were never the knower of this before from any Book; nor were you the writer of it, with your right hand; if it were so, these liars could suspect.
29.49	Yet, in whom the revelation was given, their hearts possess it as clear Signs; and none will reject Our Signs but the wicked. 
29.50	And they say, "Why has not been sent down to him, the Signs from His God? Say, "The Signs are with Allah and I am a plain warner."
29.51	What! Is it not sufficient for them that We had sent down to you, the Guidance? Assuredly in it is the mercy and the clarity for the believers.
29.52	Say, "Allah suffices as witness between me and you; and He knows what is in the heavens and the earth; so the losers are they who believe in the lies rejecting Allah."
29.53	And they hasten you for the torment; and had it not been for a respite, the torment would have reached them; yet, it will surely come to them while they perceive not. 
29.54	They urge you to hasten the torment and surely the hell is to surround the rejecters.
29.55	On that Day, the torment will cover them from above them and from under their feet; and He will say, "Taste what you were doing!"
29.56	"O My believing bondmen, surely My earth is vast; so call unto Me."
29.57	Each one shall taste of death; then, you will be returned to Us. 
29 58	And We shall surely perch those who believe and be righteous, upon the lofty palatial dwellings of the paradise beneath which rivers flow; and they shall abide therein. Blessed is the recompense of those who are dutiful!
29.59	They endured and put their trust in their God.
29.60	And how many a creature - they carry not their foods; Allah provides them and you; and He is ever the Hearer, the Knower.
29.61	And when you ask them, "Who has created the heavens and the earth - and the sun and the moon, and then subjected them?", they will surely say, "Allah!" So, whence are they then turned away?
29.62	Allah, of His bondsmen, expands provisions to whom He will - and shrinks to him; surely Allah is the Knower of each thing.
29.63	And if you ask them, "Who sends down rain from the sky and therewith revives the earth, after it is dead?", they would surely say, "Allah!" Say, "All Praise be unto Allah." Yet, most of them will not understand.
29.64	And the worldly life is nothing but pomp and show; but surely, the final house - therein is the life for sure, did they but know.(559)
29.65	And when they embark on a ship, they call upon Allah, fearing; but when He brings them to the shore, they associate others with Him.
29.66	Let them enjoy, turning away for what We have provided them - soon will they know.
29.67	Do they see not, We had securely placed them amidst a people who could be snatched away? Will they believe deception, rejecting Allah's grace?
29.68	And who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against Allah, or belies the Truth when it has come to him? Is hell not the refuge for the rejecters?
29.69	And whoever strives in Our way, We indeed guide them in Our Straight Paths; verily, Allah is with the righteous.

Chapter 30
Rum
											
30.1	Alif Laam Meem - A L M (560)
30.2	Rum has fallen!(561)
30.3	In the near land! But they, after their fall, will triumph.
30.4	In a short period; the command is Allah's - before and after; and on that Day, the believers will rejoice.
30. 5	By Allah's help! He helps whom He will - and He is Mighty, Merciful.
30.6	This is the Promise of Allah - He fails not in His Promise, but most understand not.
30.7	They only know the outwardness of this worldly life - and, they are heedless of the next life.
30.8	Do they not consider? Allah has not created all that is in the heavens and in the earth and everything in between but for a period specified, and in truth? Most of the humankind belie the meeting with their God.
30.9	Do they not see the world around and know the end of the people before them? They were mightier than them and did agriculture, and they used the land better than how they used it; and, to them their messengers came with clear proofs; Allah never did them wrong, but they wronged themselves.
30.10	Then when they belied Allah's Signs and mocked it, - lo! evil was the end of the evil doers.
30.11	Allah begins the creations, then recreates - then, unto Him you will be returned.
30.12	And on the Hour, the wicked will despair.
30.13	Then none of those whom they had associated will ever intercede for them, and will despair of those whom they did associate.
30.14	And on the Hour of the Day, they shall sunder.
30.15	So, whoever believe and stay righteous they shall live with joy in a green meadow.
30.16	And as to those who became disbelievers in Our Signs and denied the meeting on the last day, will be arraigned into the punishment.
30.17 	So, Praise the Purity of Allah, as you course through the eventide, and as ye rise in the morn.
30.18	And all Praise be unto Him in the heavens and earth - and in the eventide and at noon.
30.19	He brings forth the living from the dead; and brings forth the dead from the living; and revives the earth after it is dead - thus, will ye be raised up.
30.20	And that He has created you from the dust, and your spreading out as human beings are among His Signs.
30.21	And of His Signs is that He created from among you, your pair, wherein you find comfort and in that He has caused Love and Mercy between you. Indeed, in it are the Signs for those who reflect. 
30.22	And of His Signs is the creation of heavens and the earth; and your varied tongues, and colours. Indeed, in it are the Signs for those who know.
30.23	And of His Mercy is, in the night and day, and your sleep, and your seeking of His bounties. Surely, herein are the Signs for those who have ears.
30.24	And of His Signs is that He shows the lightning, wherein is fear and hope; and, sends down rain from the sky thereby revives the earth after it is dead. Surely, in it are the Signs for those who give thought.
30.25	And of His Signs is that by His command the heavens and the earth withstand. Then, when there is a call, you will emerge from the earth.
30.26	And to Him belongs what is in the heavens and the earth. All obey Him.
30.27	And He begins creations - then originates; and it is easy for Him. And to Him belongs all the Beautiful Names in the heavens and the earth; He is the Mighty, the Wise.
30.28	He sets forth a similitude for you from among you: Do you share that which Allah has bestowed upon you and make yourself equal with those whom your right hand possesses? Or, do you fear them as you fear those of your likes? Thus, do We reveal to those who comprehend.
30.29	But the evil ones chase only their desires without sense - so, who shall guide him, whom Allah had left astray? And they have no helpers!
30.30	So fix your direction upon the straight path. The Way Allah has created the humankind is the straight path. There is no change in Allah's creation. It is the direction, firm - but most men will not understand.(562)
30.31	Turn only in His direction with piety and stand steadfast in God's remembrance. And become not of the associators.
30.32	Whoever causes schisms in the straight path, each schismatic rejoices in what he has. 
30.33	When the people suffer an affliction, they turn only to their God; and they pray to Him alone. Then, when He makes them taste from His Mercy, a section among them set up partners to their God.
30.34	Let them be rejecting, Our Mercy. "Keep enjoying; soon you will know."
30.35	Or, have We sent down upon them a Sign as a proof for their associating?
30.36	And they rejoice when We make the people taste the Mercy. But behold, they despair when an evil befalls them for what their hands have forwarded.
30.37	Do they not see Allah indeed expands and restricts the provisions to whom He will? Certainly in it are the Signs for people who believe.
30.38	So, grant the near ones their right and thus, to the righteous. Whoever seek Allah's countenance, it is best for them; they are the victors. 
30.39	If you lend the investment of the people for the interest, it will not increase with Allah. But when you seek Allah's satisfaction and purification, it will increase with Allah; and, whoever would lend in this way, are they who had doubled.
30.40	Allah created you and then gave you comforts; then, He causes your death - then, again raises you up. Is there any of your deities does aught of these? Allah is the Most Pure, and He is the Most High and above what they associate.
30.41	Corruption erupted in the land and sea for what the men had wrought with their hands; and He makes them taste a little of what they had worked so that they may return.
30.42	Say, "Travel through the land and behold what happened to those before you. Most of them were associators."
30.43	So, establish your face in the straight path, before a day from Allah that none can stall, arrives. On that day, they will dissociate. 
30.44	Whoever reject, evil for them is their rejection; and, whoever do good, they only prepare themselves for the best. 
30.45	He bestows of His Bounties to those who believe and stay righteous; indeed, He does not like the disbelievers.
30.46	And among His Signs - that He sends the winds bearing the glad tidings; and, that He lets you taste of His Mercy; and, that He sails the ship at His Command; and, that you may seek of His Bounties - and, that you may show thanks to Him.
30.47	And Verily, We sent messengers before you to their people. And they came to them with clear Signs. Then We took retribution on those who sinned - then, it is upon Us to favour the believers.
30.48	It is Allah who sends the winds, raising clouds and spreads them in the sky in chunks as He wills; so, you see the rain coming down from its density; then, when He brings upon whom He wills of His bondsmen, they rejoice.
30.49	But they indeed were in despair before it came upon them, and before it.
30.50	So, look at the prints of Allah's Mercy; how He quickens the earth after it is dead; indeed, He is the quickener of the dead and He has power over all things.
30.51	But when they see Us send a wind and find them turn yellow, then they become unbelievers.(563)
30.52	So, indeed you shall not make the dead hear; neither would you make the deaf hear who turns away, rejecting.
30.53	And you shall not guide the blind out of their error; neither you shall make any hear save those who would surrender to Our Signs, believing.
30.54	Allah created you as a weakling; then, after the weakness He gave strength; then, after strength, He causes weakness and greying. He creates what He will; and, is the Knower of all things. The All-Powerful. 
30.55	And on the Lasting Hour, the sinners would swear that they had not tarried but a snap; thus were they deluded.
30.56	And those who were given the wisdom and faith would say, 'by Allah's count, you tarried until you were raised up! So, this is the day of Upraising and you were ignorant'.
30.57	So, on that day, the excuses of the sinners avail them nought; nor could they appease.
30.58	In faith, in this Quran, We have enumerated many an example for humankind. But, if you were to bring any truth before them the unbelievers would surely say, "Ye, but liars!"
30.59	Thus, Allah seals the hearts of the ignorant.
30.60	So, be patient. Verily, Allah's Promise is True. And, let not those who are uncertain dishearten you.
		
Chapter 31
Lukmaan
			
31.1	Alif, Laam, Meem - A L M (564)
31.2	These are the Signs of the Book of Wisdom.(565)
31.3	A Guidance and Mercy for the righteous.
31.4	They will ever be in Allah's remembrance and give of the purest things; and they will have firm faith in the lasting life, in the end.
31.5	These are them upon the guidance of their God and they are the victors.
31.6	And there are of men - they, pervertedly, acquire fantasies to obstruct Allah's path and to take it in mockery. For them is the humiliating punishment.
31.7	And when We recite Our Signs to him, he turns away in arrogance as if he had not heard them - that he has deafness in both the ears. Admonish him: 'For him is the chastising doom'.
31.8	Verily, for those who believe and stay righteous, are the Graceful Paradises.
31.9	They will abide therein - Allah's Promise is True. He is the Exalted, the Wise.
31.10	He has raised the skies without the supports(566) and that you see them. And He erected firm, the mountains upon the earth - that it shall not shake with you; and He made all varieties of cattle spread upon it. And We sent down the rain from the sky and caused the produces to grow and paired them with their noble kind.
31.11	"Such are Allah's creation - show me those but Him, who have created a thing." Nay! The wrongdoers are in clear error.
31.12	And Verily, We gave wisdom to Lukmaan: "Be grateful to Allah; for, whoever shows gratitude, he shows gratitude for his self; and whoever rejects - surely, Allah is Needless, Glorious."
31.13	And when Lukmaan said to his son, "My dear son, set not association to Allah; surely, association is a grave injustice."
31.14	And, We have advised man concerning his parents; his mother borne him in weakness upon weakness; and weaning him away is two years. So, be grateful to Me and to your parents; and, Unto Me is your return.
31.15	But if they force you to set partners unto Me, that of which you have no knowledge, then, obey them not; but consort with them in the world kindly. And follow the path of those who always look up to Me; and then, your return is unto Me - then, I will reveal to you what you used to do.
31.16	"My dear son, even if it is of the weight of a mustard seed, and it is inside a rock, or in the skies, or in the depth of the earth - Allah will bring it forth; Allah indeed, is Subtle, All-Aware.
31.17	"My dear son, stay constant in obeying Allah; and, enjoin the good and forbid the evil; and, be patient over evil that befalls you - this indeed, is the steadfast heart of things.
31.18	"And turn not your cheek from men; and walk not exultant on the earth. Surely, Allah will not love any vainglorious conceit.
31.19	"And be moderate in your conduct and be kind in your voice; the most hateful of the voices is indeed the noise of the donkeys.
31.20	Do you not see that Allah surely has subjected to you what is in the heavens and what is in the earth and that He has abundantly placed His benevolence within you and outside of you? But there are people, who argue concerning Allah without knowledge, guidance and the luminous wisdom.
31.21	When it is said to them, "Follow that which Allah has sent down to you", they say: "We will follow only that wherein we found our forefathers." What! Even when the shaitan calls them to the blazing fire?"
31.22	And whoever turns his heart to Allah doing good deeds, has surely grasped a firm handhold; and, with Allah rest the End of all affairs.
31.23	And whoever rejects, his rejection need not grieve you; their return is unto Us. Then, We will inform them of what they used to do - surely, Allah knows what is in the breasts.
31.24	We give them enjoyment a little; then, We will thrust them into severe and agonising torment.
31.25	And if you say to them, "Who created the skies and the earth?" They will surely say, "Allah!" Say: Praise be to Allah! But most of them do not understand.
31.26	Unto Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. Verily, Allah is Free of Need, worthy of All-Praise.
31.27    	And surely, even if all the woods on the earth are pens, and the seas, and seven more such are added - the Names of Allah will be far from finished. Verily, Allah is the Exalted, the Wise.(567)
31.28	Your creation and your raising up are not but as a sole, soul; surely, Allah is the Hearer, the Seer.
31.29	Do you not see Allah ushers the night into day and the day into night; and, that He has subjected to you the sun and moon; and, each completing its term decreed. Allah indeed, is Ever-Cognisant of your works.
31.30	For surely, Allah is the Truth and whatever they call upon other than Him are falsehood; and Allah is Most High, Most Great.
31.31	Do you not see that the ships with Allah's bestow sail in the sea, perchance you see Allah's Signs? In it indeed are the Signs for every one forbearing, grateful.
31.32    	And if mountainous waves cover them, they sincerely call Allah in the soul of their hearts; but if He delivers them safe to the shore, some take to the middle path - yet, but for the treacherous ingrate, none rejects the Warnings. 
31.33    O humans! Fear your God; and fear that Day - a father shall not help his son; and the son cannot carry out anything for his father; indeed, Allah's Words are True. So, the worldly life of the people shall not deceive you, nor the deceiver deceives you regarding Allah.
31.34    	Surely, with Allah, is the knowledge of the Hour; it is He who sends down the rain and knows what is in the wombs; and, none knows what he will earn tomorrow; nor perceives where on the earth would he die. Verily, Allah is the Knower, the Astute. 

Chapter 32
Absolute Surrender

32.1	Alif, Laam, Meem - A L M(568)
32.2	As to the Revelation of the Book, there is no doubt it is from the God of the worlds. 
32.3	Or do they say, "He has conjured this?" Nay! This is the Truthful warning from your God to a people to whom has not come a warner before you, that haply they are guided.
32.4	It is Allah who has created heavens and the earth and whatever is in between, in six periods; and then, He placed His authority over them all; there is no helper nor an interceder for you besides Him; so, will you not mind?
32.5    	He conducts the affairs from the sky to the earth; then, on a day, it will ascend to Him whose extent is a thousand years in your count.
32.6	He is the Knower of what is hidden and manifest. He is the  Mighty, the Merciful.
32.7	It is He who beautified each of His creation; and, He began the creation of humanity from clay.
32.8	Then He created his generations from the essence of a drop despised. 
32.9	Then He breathed into him His Revelation and caused perfection to your hearing, and sight, and hearts; little thanks you show.
32.10	And they say, "When we become dust, will we be truly in a new creation?" Nay, they reject the meeting with their God. 
32.11	The 'angel of death' assigned upon you will take you and then you will be returned to your God.
32.12	When you see the sinners hanging their heads before their God and say, "Our God! We have witnessed - henceforth, send us back; we will be righteous; surely, we believe."
32.13	And if We had willed We would have guided each. But, My stern Word that I would fill the hell with Jinn and Men together had gone forth.
32.14	So, taste for your denial of the meeting of this day of yours; indeed, We too forget you. And taste the lasting torment for what you did. 
32.15	The ones who believe in Our Signs are those, who when reminded of them would praise the purity of their God, in total surrender; and, they will not be boasting.
32.16	They will rise up from the bed and remember their God with fear and faith; and, they will spend of that We have bestowed upon them.
32.17	And no one shall know that We have hidden for them as comfort to eyes as reward for what they did.
32.18	Then, will the believers be like those who transgress? Nay!
32.19	As for those who believe and stay righteous, for them are the paradises as their abiding places for their deeds.
32.20	But whoever sins, their abode is fire - every time they try to escape it, they will be pushed back into it and said, "Taste the torment of fire which you had been denying."
32.21	And We will make them taste a nearer punishment before a greater torment touches them haply that they may return.
32.22	And who is more unjust than he, who turns away after he was reminded of his God's Signs? Surely, of the criminals, We shall take retribution.
32.23	Verily, We gave Musa the Book; so be not in doubt about his receiving; and, We made it a Guide for the descendants of Israel.
32.24	And when they endured and stood firm on Our Signs, We made among them, the guiding leaders.
32.25    	Your God will judge between them on the Lasting Day, concerning that wherein they differed.
32.26	Is it not a guidance to them how many nations We destroyed before, and, in whose dwelling places they walk? Verily, in this are clear Signs. Will they not then heed?
32.27	Do they not see? It is We indeed drive the rain-clouds to the barren land and bring forth thereby the produces for them and their cattle. Do they not then see?
32.28	They ask: When is this victory if you speak truly?
32.29	Say: "On the day of the victory, their faith avails them not nor will they be respited."
32.30	So, dismiss them and expect; indeed, they do expect too.

Chapter 33
The Treacherous Forces

33.1	O Prophet! Fear Allah and obey not the unbelievers and the treacherous. Verily, Allah is the Knowing, the Wise.
33.2	And follow that with which your God inspires you. Verily, Allah sees all that you do.
33.3	And rely on Allah. Allah is sufficient as a Trustee.
33.4	Allah has not created two minds in anyone's heart; and, because you say to any of your wives, "You are like my mother," He would not make them your mothers nor your adopted sons, your sons; all these are vanities from your mouth. Allah speaks the Truth and Guides aright.
33.5	You shall call them after their true fathers; and, if you do not know their fathers, they are your brethren and friends in righteousness; and if you had mistaken, no blame on you. But if your hearts do wrong - And, Allah is Most Forgiving, Most Merciful.
33.6	This Prophet - for the believers, is greater than themselves; and their wives are their mothers. And of the relations some are dearer than the believers and the emigrants. This is the Decree in Allah's Book: if you wish to help your friends, it is allowed.
33.7	And when We took the covenant from the prophets and you; and, from Nuh, Ibrahim, Musa and Esa, son of Maryam, We took a solemn covenant.
33.8	So, He will ask the truthful about their truth; and for those who disbelieve, He has prepared a chastising punishment.
33.9	O believers! Remember Allah's favours upon you; when the forces came down upon you, We drove upon them the wind, and, the forces you cannot see; and, Allah is Ever Watchful of what you do.
33.10	When they came upon you from above you and from below you - your sight swerved, your heart reached to the throats and you grew suspicious about Allah.
33.11	There the believers were tested and were shocked with a severe shock.
33.12	And remember when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts were the disease said, "Allah and His messenger has not promised us but deceit."
33.13	And among them when a party said, "O people of Yasrib! You shall not withstand; so turn back," a party of them said to the prophet, "Indeed, our homes are not safe," while truly it is not that they are unsafe - they only wished to flee.
33.14	And if the forces came upon them from different directions and were asked to cause confusion, then, they would have done so; and, would not have delayed it but a while.
33.15	And they have certainly sworn before Allah that they would not turn back. An oath to Allah, to be questioned of.
33.16	Say, "Flight from death or killing shall not benefit you - then, you shall comfort but a little while."
33.17	Say, "Who shall guide you if Allah intends harm for you? Or, if He intends a Mercy for you! They will not find for them besides Allah, a Guide nor any Helper."
33.18	Allah certainly knows those amidst you who hinder and say to their brethren, "Come to us!" And they do not face the evil but meekly. 
33.19	They are niggardly towards you; but when fear grips them, you will find them looking at you with their eyes rolling, like one who swoons of death. But when the fear departs, they will sting you with their sharp tongues in their greed for wealth - such have not believed; so, Allah has destroyed their deeds; and, it is easy for Allah.
33.20	They think the forces have not left - if the forces are to return, they will wish they were of the ignorant inquiring news about you; yet, even if they had been with you, they would not have withstood but a little. 
33.21    	Surely, there is a perfect exemplar in the Messenger of Allah for those who believe in Allah, and in the lasting day; and, in those who, ever-remember Allah.
33.22	And when the believers saw the confederate enemies, said, "This is what Allah and His Messenger have prophesied; and, Allah and His Messenger are true; and, it only increased their belief and peace.
33.23	Of those who believed are they who lived up to the covenant; and, of them some reached their goal while others are expecting - they did not differ a trifle in their promise.
33.24	Allah will surely recompense the truthful for their truth; He will Punish whom He will or will Forgive - surely, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
33.25	And Allah repulsed the unbelievers away, in their rage; they gained no good; and, Allah suffices for the believers in their striving. Allah is All-Powerful, All-Mighty.
33.26	And He brought those of the people of the Book who helped, down from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts; you killed some and some you made captive.
33.27	And He made you heirs for their lands, and their houses, and their wealth and to the extent of earth you had not imagined; and, Allah has Power over all things.
33.28	O Prophet! Say to your wives, "If you desire this world and its glamour, come, I will release you with provisions generous, gracious."
33.29	"But if you believe in Allah and His Messenger, and the House in the Hereafter, Allah indeed, has prepared for the good among you, a mighty reward." 
33.30	"O wives of the Prophet! If any of you indulge in open lewdness, her punishment will be doubled; and, it is easy for Allah."
33.31	"And whoever of you obey Allah and His Messenger and do good, We would double her reward."
33.32	"O wives of the prophet! You are not as any of the women; if you fear God, then, speak not in casual terms lest in whose heart is a disease will desire; so, speak mindfully."
33.33	"Live in your houses! And roam not as you used to do ignorantly; and, surrender to God and give for your purity. And obey Allah and His Messenger. O the people of the houses, Allah only wishes to purify you, removing your evils."
33.34	And give thought to the Signs and Wisdom of Allah, recited in your houses - indeed, Allah is Most Gentle, All-Knowing. 
33.35	Verily, Allah is Ever-Forgiving and has prepared a Magnanimous Reward for those peace-loving men and peace-loving women; the believing men and the believing women; the surrendering men and the surrendering women; the truthful men and the truthful women; the enduring men and the enduring women; the God-fearing men and the God-fearing women; the righteous men and the righteous women; the fasting men and the fasting women; the honourable men and the honourable women; and, those of the men and women who oft remember Allah. 
33.36	And when Allah and His Messenger has decreed a thing, then over it, shall there be no options for a believing man or woman. So, whoever differs against Allah and His Messenger, surely they are in manifest error.
33.37	And when you said to him, to whom Allah has favoured, and you had favoured, "Keep your wife with you and fear Allah," you feared the people and concealed in your heart that which Allah was to reveal. But Allah has the greater right that you should fear Him. So, when Zayd has performed what is necessary to set her free, we gave her to you in marriage. It is because there shall not be a hindrance for the believers to marry the divorced wives of their adopted sons. And this is the decree of Allah to be fulfilled.
33.38	There is no wrong on the prophet that he fulfilled Allah's command; this has been Allah's Way with those who passed away of old. And Allah's command is a decree determined.
33.39	They will deliver Allah's Command and will fear only Allah; and, they will fear none but Allah. So, Allah suffices for accounting.
33.40	'Muhammad' has not been the father of any of your males. But he is a Messenger of Allah and the Seal of the Prophethood. And Allah Knows all.(569)
33.41	O believers, remember Allah more and more.
33.42	And Praise His Purity morning and evening-
33.43	It is He who showers His Grace upon you to bring you forth from darkness to light; and, His angels. And He is Merciful to the believers.
33.44	On the Day of their meeting Him, their greeting is, "PEACE!." And He has prepared for them a noble reward.
33.45	O Prophet, We have indeed sent you as a witness, and a bringer of good tiding and a warner;
33.46	Calling unto Allah by His leave, and as a luminous one.
33.47    	So give the believers the good news that there awaits them Allah's Grace.
33.48	And obey not the disbelievers and hypocrites; and, heed not their hurt; but put your trust in Allah. And Allah suffices as Helper.
33.49	O believers, if you have married and divorced the believing women before touching them, there is no waiting period concerning them - so, release them with a beautiful grant of provisions.
33.50    	O Prophet! We have indeed made lawful to you - those wives to whom you have given their dowries, and, those whom you righteously possess of whom Allah had favoured you. And, the daughters of your father's brothers, the daughters of your father's sisters, the daughters of your mother's brothers and the daughters of your mother's sisters - of them who migrated with you. And, a believing woman, if sacrifices herself in the cause of the prophet and if the prophet consenting, - this is only for you excluding the believers. We are Well-Aware what We have commanded them about their wives and about whom they rightfully possess - so that there shall not be stress upon you. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful. (570)
33.51	You can exempt whom you will of them and retain whom you will; or, take back of them whom you had deferred - there is no blame on you; so that it is reassurance to their hearts and that they shall be free from dissatisfaction; and, that each of them are at ease with what you had entrusted them - this is the easy way. And Allah is aware of what you have in your breasts; and, Allah is All-Knowing, Forbearing.
33.52	After this, it is not lawful for you to have women other than what you possess in righteousness - and, not to change wives however pleasing their manners are to you. Allah is Vigilant over all things.
33.53    	O believers, unless invited enter not the houses of the Prophet anticipating a feast; but if called then step in; and when you have feasted, disperse and stay not indulging in 'hadiths' - abominable talks; it shall embarrass the Prophet. He may hesitate to condemn you but, Allah will not falter to say the Truth. And, if you are to ask for anything from the Prophet's wives, ask them honourably; this will purify your hearts and their hearts. It does not befit you that you hurt the Messenger of Allah; and, you shall not marry his wives after him - indeed, it is a grave crime before Allah. (571)
33.54	Whether you reveal a thing or conceal it, surely Allah is ever the Knower of all things.
33.55	It is no blame on them when they are - before their fathers, their sons, their brothers, the sons of their brothers, the sons of their sisters, their daughters and their right hand possessed ones. So, fear Allah. Allah indeed is a witness over all things.
33.56	Allah sends His blessings on the Prophet; and, the angels seek blessings for him. O, believers! Seek blessings on him and greet him with "Peace!"
33.57	Allah indeed curses those who hurt Allah and His Messenger in this world and the world to come; and, has prepared for them a disgraceful torment. 
33.58	And those who malign the believing men and the believing women with what they had not done, surely they bear the slander and a manifest sin.
33.59	O, Prophet! say to your wives, your daughters and the women of the believers, "Wear your garments suitable to the land so that they shall be known and not troubled." And Allah is Ever Forgiving, Most Merciful.(572)
33.60	We will certainly urge you against the hypocrites who have evil in their hearts, and who indulge in false propaganda in the cities - if they do not restrain; then, they will be your neighbors but a while.
33.61	Accursed, they will be seized wherever they are found and culled to death.
33.62	Allah's Way - and for those who have gone before; and, you shall not find a change in Allah's Way.
33.63	People ask you concerning the Hour. Say: The Wisdom of it is only with Allah. Do you know it? It may be nigh!
33.64	Verily, Allah has cursed the rejecters and prepared for them a blaze.
33.65	They shall abide therein and will find for them neither a protector, nor a helper.
33.66	On that day when their faces are turned sides in the fire, they would say, 'woe to us! We should have obeyed Allah and the Messenger.'
33.67	And they will say, "Our God, verily, we followed our leaders and our elders, and they led us astray from the way." 
33.68	"Our God, torment them twofold, and curse them with a mighty curse."
33.69	O believers! Be not like those who annoyed Musa, but Allah declared him quit of what they alleged, and he was ever with Allah in dignity.
33.70	O believers! Fear Allah and speak the just words.
33.71	He will make easy your affairs, and He will forgive your sins; and, whoever follows Allah and His Messenger, he has certainly won success, grand.
33.72	Verily, We had offered Our trust to the earth and the mountains, but they refused to bear it - they feared to undertake it; but, the man received it; surely, man is arrogant and ignorant
33.73	Allah will punish the hypocritical men and hypocritical women and the men and the women who set up partners to Allah. And He pardons the believing men and women. And Allah is Most Forgiving, Most Merciful.

Chapter 34
Saba

34.1	All glory be to Allah! To Him belongs what is in the heavens and what is in the earth; and, His is the Praise of the Hour. And He is Most Wise, All-Knowing.
34.2	He knows that which enters the earth and what sprouts out, and that which descends from the heavens and what ascends to it. And He is Cognisant, All-Knowing.
34.3	Yet the rejecters say, "The Hour shall not come upon us!" Say, "Nay! By my God, surely it will come to you; and, He knows that which is unseen; in the heavens or on the earth an iota of a thing will not be hidden from Him; nor smaller than that nor bigger, it is in a clear record."
34.4	That the believing righteous shall receive the reward and for them is Forgiveness and generous provisions.
34.5	And those who strive to defeat Our Signs, for them is a painful torment.
34.6	Whoever is given the wisdom, they see that what is revealed to you from your God is the truth and, it takes us to the straight path of the Almighty and the Praiseworthy. 
34.7	But those who reject say, "Shall we show you a man who announces that you will be a new creation after you had become dust with the dust?"
34.8	Or does he invent lies about Allah or is he mad? Nay, those who do not believe in the Hereafter are in agony and in serious error.
34.9	Do they not see what is before them and after them in the heavens and the earth? If We will, We would plunge them into the earth, or We would cause a piece from the sky to fall upon them; to every servant who look up to, indeed has a Sign in this.
34.10	And surely We bestowed Dawood Our Bounty: "O mountains! Follow through his command; and, O birds!" And We made iron soft for him.
34.11	"Make strongest war shields, and set right the weak points; and, do rightful deeds. Indeed, My watch over you is intent."
34.12	And to Sulaiman, the Winds - the distance of its speed was that of a month of morning and evening; and, We made the brass a stream for him, and We subjected the jinns for him by Our grant - of them whoever rebels, We will make him taste the blaze. 
34.13	Fashioning for him whatsoever he would - magnificent monuments, immense statues, gigantic bowls, and anchored huge cooking pots. O descendants of Dawood! Be grateful. But of My servants, rare are they who show thanks.(573)
34.14	When We appointed death for him, nothing informed the jinns of his death except the termites that eroded his staff; and, when he fell, the jinns saw it clearly that had they got the knowledge of the unseen, they need not have been in the disdainful punishment.
34.15	Verily, for the Sabians, was there a Sign in the houses they lived; on their right and left there were twin gardens: "Taste from the good of what your God has bestowed and show thanks to Him - a bountiful land, and the Merciful God."
34.16	But they turned away. So We sent upon them a flood causing a dam-wreck; and, we gave them in exchange for the twin gardens, two gardens bearing sour and bitter fruits and a few lote-trees.
34.17	We recompensed them for their rejection. And will We recompense others but the rejecters?
34.18    	And We have created between them and the cities We had blessed, towns apparent and well We measured between them the journeying:: "Travel therein by night and by day, securely!"
34.19	But they said, "Our God, increase the distance of our journeying." Thus they wronged themselves; and, so We made them a history and scattered them into a scatter. Indeed in this are the Signs for the enduring and the grateful.
34.20	And certainly Iblis proved true his assessment about them; and, they followed him, save the party of the believers.
34.21	But, he has no authority over them - yet, that We know the believers in the Hereafter from them who are in doubt thereof. And your God is the Guardian over all things.
34.22	Call them whom you have in mind besides Allah; they do not have an iota of authority over the skies or on the earth, nor do they have any share in them, nor he has in them a supporter.
34.23	And, save whom He has given permission, no intercession avails with Him. So, when the terror is removed from their hearts, they will say, "What did your God say?" They will answer: "The Truth! He is the All-High, the All-Great!"
34.24	Say, "Who provides you from the heavens and the earth?" And say, "Allah! Is it we or you - who indeed is guided aright or in manifest error?"
34.25	Say, "You shall not be asked of what we do, nor shall we be asked of what you do."
34.26	Our God will gather us all together; and then, He will judge between us in truth. He is the Greatest Judge, the All-Knowing.
34.27	Say, "Show me them whom you associated as equal with Him! Nay, He is Allah, the Mighty, the Wise."
34.28	And We sent not you but as a giver of glad tiding and a warner to humankind; yet, most of the people will not know. 
34.29	And they say, "When is the word if you speak truly?"
34.30	Say, "Yours is an appointed Hour; neither will there be a delay nor hastening of it."
34.31	And the rejecters say, "We shall surely not believe this Quran and What was before it." If you find these sinners when they are brought before their God, some will turn to face some of them - those who were oppressed will say to those who were arrogant, "But for you, we would indeed have been believers."
34.32	Those who were arrogant will say to those who were oppressed, "Did we hinder you from the straight path after it has reached you? Nay, rather you were sinners."
34.33	The oppressed will say to the arrogant, "Nay, you conspired against us by night and day and caused us to reject Allah and that we should associate partners unto Allah." But when they see their agony, they will hide their remorse; and We will fetter their necks. Will they ever be recompensed except for what they used to do?
34.34	And to whichever town We send a warner the affluent therein would but say, "Surely we reject that which you had been sent with."
34.35	And they say, "We are mighty in wealth and people; so we shall not be punished."
34.36	Say, "My God increases the wealth upon whom He will and reduces too. But most of the people do not know."
34.37	And it is neither your wealth nor people would bring you near to us; but, whoever believe and do righteous deeds, to them is double the reward for what they did; and they will reside in peace in mansions, magnificent."
34.38	And those who strive to defeat Our Signs will be brought in pain.
34.39	Say, "Verily, my God will increase the wealth to whom He will of His bondmen; and, He decreases to whom He will. So He recompenses for whatever you spend, and He is the Best of Providers. 
34.40	And on the day when He shall gather them all together, He would say to the angels, "Are these the ones, worshiping you?"
34.41	They will say, "You are Most Pure; You are our Deliverer and not these; yet, they were worshiping Jinns - and, most of them were believers in them."
34.42	We will say to those who sinned, "But this day you will neither be able to benefit nor harm one another; so, taste the torment of fire that which you used to deny."
34.43	And when Our clear Signs are recited to them, they say, "He is but a mortal, and he wishes to prevent you from that which your ancestors used to worship. And they say, "It is not but a conjured up lie." And when the Truth came to them, the unbelievers say, "It is sorcery, manifest!"
34.44	But We have not given them a scripture for revelation, nor have We sent them before you a warner.
34.45	And the people before them did strive to deny; and, they did not receive even a tenth of what We gave them. Yet, they cried lies to My messengers; so, how was My abhorrence.
34.46	Say: "I only advise you of one thing; rise and ponder for Allah, in twos or singly; your friend has no madness; he is not except a warner before a terrible suffering comes to you."
34.47	Say: "I seek not any wage of you; let it be with you. My wages are with none but Allah. He is over all things, Witness."
34.48	Say: My God indeed, raises the Truth; He Knows the hidden things.
34.49		Say: "The Truth has come! And, the falsehood has achieved nothing new thus far, and, no further."
34.50    	Say: "If I err, erring is my loss; and, if I am on the straight path, it is because of the revelation from my God. Verily, He is Hearing, Nigh."
34.51	And if you see them tremble in fear, they will have no escape out; and, they will be easily seized.
34.52	And they will say, "We believe therein!" But how can they reach when they are afar off.
34.53	But before this, they rejected it, and from afar off were throwing at the Unseen.
34.54	And, as what was the destiny of their people before, there will be a barrier between them and their desires. Verily, they were in disquieting denial.

Chapter 35
The Creator
				
35.1	All Praise be to Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth; he made the angel messengers with wings in twos, threes and fours; and, He increases in creation what He wills. Verily, Allah has Power over all things.(574)
                    (574).[35.1] The  greater the numbers of the wings, the heavier the messages that the angels do carry for the people or against a people.
35.2	If ever Allah opens up a Grace upon a people there is none to withhold it; and, if He withholds, there is none to send it. And He is Mighty, Wise.
35.3	O mankind! Call to mind the favours of Allah upon you. Is there a creator other than Allah, who provides you from the heavens and the earth? There is no God but He; whence then ye turn away?
35.4	And if they deny you, they indeed denied the messengers before you. And to Allah return, all affairs.
35.5	O men! Indeed Allah's Promise is true; so, let not this world's life deceive you; and, let not the deceiver deceive you about Allah.
35.6	Surely, shaitan is your enemy; so take him for an enemy. He calls his people only to make them the inheritors of the blaze.
35. 7	Whoever reject, for them is a punishment severe; but whoever believes and stay righteous, for them is Forgiveness and a Mighty Reward.
35.8	Him, to whom the evil of his deeds shown fair, and he himself considers it fair - for indeed, Allah leaves astray whom He will, and guides whom He will. So, grieve not for them as to lose your life; Allah surely knows what they do.
35.9	And Allah send the winds that move the clouds - then We cause it to reach the dead land, and therewith We revive the land after it is dead. Thus is the rising, live.
35.10	Whoever wishes dignity - All dignity belong to Allah; every word of dignity ascends to Him; and, He dignifies all good deeds. As to those who conspire evil, awaits a harsh chastisement; and their conspiracy will come to naught.
35.11	And Allah created you from the sand; then from a drop - then he made you companions; but for His knowledge, no woman conceives nor delivers. Likewise to increase or decrease from one's age, it is not that that which is not in the words of Allah; indeed, it is easy to Allah.
35.12	And the two seas are not equal. One is fresh and sweet to drink while the other is salt and bitter; yet, from each of these you eat tasty meat and deck out the ornaments you wear; and, you see the ships cleaving the waters for you to seek His Bounties; will you not then show thanks?
35.13	It is He Who thrusts the night into the day, and the day into the night; He holds the sun and the moon under His domain, and all these exist within the time frame determined. He is your God, Allah! And whoever you call besides Him, have no power even to the husk of a date stone.
35.14	If you call them, they will not hear your call; and, if they hear, they will not answer you; and, on the last day, they will disown your worshiping them; and, none will inform you as the All-Encompassing.
35.15	O people! You are ever in need of the help of Allah. But Allah! He is All-Sufficient, All-Praised.
35.16	If He so wish, He would eliminate you and bring forth a new generation.
35.17	And it is not a matter for Allah.
35.18   	Now soul laden, will bear the load of another; and, if you call your nearest kin to carry some of your heaviest burdens - a little of it will not be borne.  And you will only warn those who fear their God soulfully and follow His Command; and, whoever is pure, he is pure for his own good; and, to Allah is the homecoming.
35.19	The blind and the seeing are not the same;
35.20	nor the darkness and light;
35.21	nor the shade and the heat.
35.22	And not equal are the living and the dead; verily, Allah causes to hear whom He will; and, you make not hear who are in the graves.
35.23	You are not a but a warner.
35.24	Verily, We have sent you in truth that you may give glad tiding and as a warner; and, there is not a people, to whom a warner has not come.
35.25	And if they deny you, surely those before them too denied; and, their messengers had come to them with clear Signs, the Scriptures and the Luminous Wisdom.
35 26	Then I seized the deniers; how then was My abhorrence?
35.27    	Do not you see that Allah sends down rain from the sky? And thereby We bring forth fruits of various colours; and, from the mountains, tracts white, red and colours of diverse hues and utter dark.
35.28	Thus are there, the diverse hues in the humans, reptiles and cattle. Verily, the God fearing are they who possess the Unseen Wisdom. Surely, Allah is All-Mighty, Oft-Forgiving. 
35.29	Verily, those who recite the Book of Allah, practise it in obedience and spend secretly and openly of what We have bestowed them - they only hope a trade, never to be a loss. 
35.30	He will give them their goodly reward, and He will further bestow upon them; surely, He is Most Forgiving, Most Appreciative.
35.31	The Wisdom We have inspired in you is True and testifies what is before it; verily, Allah, of His bondmen - All Aware, The Seer.(575)
                    (575).[35.31] What is before us is the Quran most of which is lost from the minds of the people. So, this Book is a reminder to all those who ponder the Signs of it; and, its Signs are the testimony to the revealing manifestations all around every individual, as the rewards and the sufferings affecting even a nation as a whole. Those who ponder the Signs of the Book of Allah are His bondmen and of them He chooses the successors to the Book, Quran.		
35.32	Then We chose successors to this Book of Our bondmen; but, there are them who wronged themselves; there are who took the middle course; and, there are those who by Allah's leave advanced in righteousness. And, this is the Blessing, Grand.(576)
	 (576).[35.32] After Allah revealed this Book, The Quran to Muhammad, Allah chooses the successors to the Book of His bondmen for espousing the path of brotherhood and oneness of humanity, by Allah, The Creator of all worlds. He reveals to the Peers He has chosen, gives them the clear Signs of The Book, Enlightening them. Such compeers are there around the world, in the capitals of all nations (28/59;  42/7) of every tongue (14/4), all the time (5/15, 19;  17/15), till the end of the world (17/58).	
35.33	They will enter the eternal paradises where they will be adorned with the bracelets of gold and pearls; and, their raiment will be silk.
35.34	And they say, "All Praise be to Allah, who removed all our worries. Surely, our God is Ever-Forgiving, Appreciative."
35.35	He made us dwell in our houses by His Mercy wherein no distress troubles us nor any weariness touches us.
35.36	And whoever rejects, for them is the hell fire; their life will not end as to finish them nor their torment will be lessened; thus, We will reward the rejecters. 
35.37	And therein they will cry out, "Our God! Release us! We will do right, not what we used to do." "Have We not given you a long life to think, for those who would reflect? And a warner did come to you! So, taste! For, there is not a helper for the unjust."
35.38	Verily, Allah Knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth; and He Knows the secrets of the hearts.(577)
	(577).[35.38] Allah has set a very secret connection between the heavens and the earth, and the heart of man. The Creator of all secrets and the Knower of all secrets, Allah, rules between the heart of a man and all his affairs, all his life (8/24). He commands the heavens and the earth and everything in between to fall in line, by the secrets of his heart. Therefore, a man earns either the harm or the benefit as to the nature of his secrets. The pious are those who fear their evil secrets in their hearts, for they are well aware of their disease in their hearts (2/10).
35.39	He made you the viceroys on the earth; so, whoever rejects, to him is his rejection; and their disbelief increases them not in the sight of their God except in hatred; and to the disbelievers, their rejection increases not but loss. 
35.40	Say: Have you seen your partner-gods whom you worship besides Allah? Show me, what have they created in the earth? Or in the heavens do they have any partnership? Or have We given them the Wisdom to see the Signs? Nay! What some of the wicked promise to some others is naught but deceit.
35.41	Verily,  Allah holds the heavens and the earth together from falling apart; and, if they fall apart, then none shall prevent them; surely He is Forbearing, Forgiving.
35.42	And whenever a Warner came to them, they indeed solemnly swore by Allah, that they would be more compliant than any other nation; yet, when the Warner came to them, it increased them in naught save abhorrence.
35.43	They indulged in devising with arrogance, but their evil design will not encompass any save them. What! Do they await a path of those passed before them? If so, you will not find a change in Allah's Way, and you will not see in Allah's Way, a way to alter.
35.44	Have not they seen around the earth as to the end of those before them?  They were greater in strength than them; nought in the heavens and the earth shall avert Allah. Indeed, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Powerful.
35.45	And if Allah were to seize men for what they had earned, Allah would not have spared a single living being on the earth; however, He delays it to a term, decreed; when the Hour arrives - Allah indeed, over His servants, is Ever-Watchful.	


Chapter 36
Ya Seen
	
36.1 	Ya Seen(578)
36.2	By the Wisdom of Quran!
36.3	You are indeed, of the Messengers;
36.4	Upon The Guidance.
36.5	Sent down by the Al Mighty, Merciful-
36.6	That ye may warn the careless, for what their fathers not having been warned;
36.7	Certainly against most of them the word has been realised; so they will not believe.
36.8	Indeed, We had fettered their necks upto their chins; so, their heads were forced up.
36.9	And We have put a blockade before them and a blockade behind them; and, We have covered them - so, they cannot see.
36.10	And alike for them whether you warn them or you warn them not; they will not believe.
36.11	You only warn those who follow the glad tiding and fear the Bountiful in secret; and give him the glad tiding that for them is the Forgiveness and a Mighty Reward.
36.12	Verily, We raise the dead; and, We record what they had sent forth and what they had left behind - and We have archived them all.
36.13	Coin for them a similitude: When those sent came to a town folks.
36.14	When We sent twain to them, they cried them lies; so, We strengthened them with a third. They said, "We indeed are the Messengers unto you."
36.15	They said, "You are but men like us; the Beneficent has not sent anything and you only speak lies."
36.16	They said, "Our God knows we are indeed sent unto you."
36.17	"And our duty is to give you the Signs, clearly."
36.18	They said, "Verily, we augur ill of you; if you do not desist we will surely stone you; and, from us to you will be a terrible punishment."
36.19	They said, "Your evil augury be with you; and, do you see so a good tiding? Nay, you are a people froward."  
36.20	From the afar end of the city a man rushed up to them and said, "My people! Follow this Messenger."
36.21	"Follow them who do not claim any wages; and they are the guided ones."
36.22	"What is with me that I do not worship He Who created me? Your return is unto Him."
36.23	"Will I take any god besides Him; if the Benevolent intends me a harm, their intercession shall not avail me aught; nor will they deliver me.
36.24	"Indeed, I would then be in manifest error.
36.25	"Assuredly, I trust only in your God; therefore, listen to me."
36.26	It was said to him: "Enter the Paradise!" He said: "Lo! If only my people would know.
36.27	"My God has made me of the dignified, forgiving my sins!"
36.28	And We did not send upon his people after him any host from the heaven; and, it is not that We send so.
36.29	It is a single blast; and, they were ashes.
36.30	Woe to My servants! Whichsoever Messenger comes to them, they were not any but ridiculing him.
36.31	How many generations have We destroyed before them! Do not they see that they will never come back to them?
36.32	And indeed, they will all be gathered and brought before Us.
36.33	And the dead earth is a Sign for them; it is We who give life to it and bring forth the grain whereof they eat.
36.34	And We produce therein orchards of  date-palms and vines and therein We caused the springs to gush forth.
36.35	that they may eat of their fruits; but, their hands made it not - so, will they not show thanks?
36.36	Most Pure is He Who created in pairs - of what the earth produces, of themselves and of what they knew not.
36.37	And unto them, the Night is a Sign; We remove the day from it and so they plunge into darkness.
36.38	And the Sun moving, staying in its orbit - this is a decree from the All-Powerful, the All-Knowing.
36.39	And We have made stages for the moon till it returns like an aged palm-bough.
36.40	Sun can touch the moon and the night cannot overtake the day; thus each swims, staying in its orbit.
36.41	And a Sign unto them! We carry their generations in the provisions-laden ship.
36.42	And We had created for them the likes of it to embark.
36.43	And if We will, We drown them; then, there will be none to help them, nor will they be saved.
36.44	Except that they might taste Our Grace for a while,
36.45	And if you say, "Fear what is before you and what is after you," so that they may receive the Grace-
36.46	And whatever be the Sign from Allah comes to them, they but turn away from it.
36.47	If it is said, "Spend from what Allah has given you," the unbelievers say to the believers, "Is it right to give those to whom Allah would have provided, had He willed? Ye are in manifest error."
36.48	And they say, "If you speak truly, when shall the promise come to pass?"
36.49	They do not but await, only for a blast, and it will seize them even as they do debate.
36.50	Then they will not be able to name the heirs, nor will they return to their folks.
36.51	And when the Voice is blown, they will rise from their graves and hasten to their God.
36.52	They will say: "Our grief! Who woke us up from our resting place?" Such is the Promise of the Benevolent, and the Truth the messengers delivered.
36.53	There will be nothing but a blast! At once, they will be before us!
36.54	This day no soul is wronged in aught, nor will ye be recompensed save for that you did.
36.55	On that day, surely the people of heaven will be well pleased.
36.56	They with their companions reclining on the couches, under the shades. 
36.57	There, the fruits will be theirs, and theirs are what they ask for.
36.58	A word from the God, the Most Merciful is: "Peace!"
36.59	And, "O the Evils, this day, you stand apart." 
36.60	O the descendants of Adam, "Did I not take a solemn oath from you that you shall not call shaitan, and that he is your open enemy?"
36.61	"And that you shall call upon Me; this is the Straight Path.
36.62	"Yet, he indeed had led a great multitude of you astray. Did you mind this not?
36.63  	"This is your promised Hell!"
36.64	"Burn therein this day because of your rejection."
36.65	On that day, We will set a seal on their mouths; their hands will say to us as to what they were earning, and their legs will be the witness too.
36.66	Had We willed We would have removed their sight; then whither will they run to find a way?
36.67	And had We willed We would have changed their form to stillness; then they would be powerless to go forward or to retreat.
36.68	And We reverse the nature of one's creation when We grow him old. Do they not then give a thought?
36.69	And We taught him not poetry, nor is it seemly for him; it is not but Quran, a clear reminder.
36.70	It warns the living humans and realises the Truth against the disbelievers.
36.71	Do they not see We indeed have created for them the cattle from Our hands that they own?
36.72	And We subdued them to them so they ride some, and some you eat.
36.73	And from them are the benefits and drinks for them; then will they not be thankful?
36.74	Yet they have taken unto them deities other than Allah for their help.
36.75	But they cannot help them - yet they will be brought as hosts against them.
36.76	Their talks need not hurt you; We Know well what they say and what they hide.
36.77	Does he not  see it is We who created man from a drop? Yet he is a open disputer?
36.78	And forgetting his creation, he coins for us an example: "Who will quicken the bones when they have become decomposed?"
36.79	Say, "He shall quicken them who created the first time, and He knows all creations!"
36.80	He creates fire for you from the green tree and lo, from it you kindle.
36.81	Is He who created the heavens and the earth, cannot create the likes of them? Yes, He indeed is the Creator, the All-Knowing.
36.82	When He intends a thing, His command is, 'Be!' And it is.
36.83	So, Blessed is He, in whose hands is the Kingdom of all things; and, unto Him will ye be returned.

Chapter 37
The Ranks

37.1	By those who range in ranks.
37.2	By those who drive with power.
37.3	By those who remember the wisdom.
37.4	Verily your God is One.
37.5	God of the heavens and the earth and all in between; the God of the Easts.
37.6	Surely We adorned the nearest sky with the beauty of the stars.
37.7	And as a deterrent to all froward devils.
37.8    	They cannot hear to the words of the raised; they will be a castaway from every side.
37.9    	They are chased-away and for them is the lasting torment.  
37.10	If they try to snatch, then a blazing torch will chase him.
37.11	Say: So which are stronger in creation - they, or that We have created? Verily, We had created them from sticky clay.
37.12	You are in awe, but they mock.
37.13	And when they are reminded, they heed not;
37.14	They scoff when they see any Sign.
37.15	And they say:  This is nothing but a clear sorcery.
37.16	"Will we truly be raised up after we are dead and become dust and bones?"
37.17	And our fathers, ancients?
37.18	Say: Yes, in all lowliness.
37.19	One blast and lo, they will see.
37.20	They will say, "Woe to us! This is the Day of Execution!"
37.21	"This is the Day of Execution, you used to deny."
37.22	"Muster the unjust, their companions and that they used to worship."
37.23	"Except Allah - then lead them to the path to hell."
37.24	"And, halt them; they are sure to be questioned."
37.25	"What happened to you that you do not help one another?"
37.26	But on that day, they will surrender.
37.27	And advance one upon another seeking.
37.28	"You indeed kept coming to us as righteous."
37.29	They will say: "Nay, but you were unbelievers!"
37.30	"And we had no authority over you; no, you were an insolent people!"
37.31	"So our God's word is realised upon us and surely we shall suffer."
37.32	"We misled you; we indeed were upon the error."
37.33	So on that day they will be companions in the suffering.
37.34	Thus do We treat the criminals!
37.35	And when said to them, "There is no God but Allah," were only proud!
37.36	And say, "Shall we forsake our gods for a poet possessed?"
37.37	Nay, he has brought the Truth and confirms the messengers.
37.38	Surely you are to suffer the chastising punishment.
37.39	And you recompense will not be but for what you used to do.
37.40	But the devout servants of Allah.
37.41	For them are all the provisions they know.
37.42	Fruits; and, they will be graced.
37.43	In the gardens of delight.
37.44	On couches, facing each other.
37.45	The glasses of clear drinks will come around them.
37.46	Crystal-clear and a delight to the drinkers.
37.47	It has no evil, nor is there drunkenness.
37.48	And with them will be they who have devotedness and clear sight.
37.49	They will be like the pearls in the shell.
37.50	Some advance unto some others, exchanging pleasantries.
37.51	One of them will say: "Lo, I had a dear friend!
37.52	Who would say: "Are you indeed, a confirmer?
37.53	"Is it that we will be recompensed after we are dead and had been to dust and bones?
37.54	He said, "Would you see?"
37.55	He saw; saw him in the centre of hell.
37.56	He shall say: "By Allah, well-nigh you destroyed me!"
37.57	"Had it not been for the grace of my God I too would have been of those brought in."
37.58	"Will we die?"
37.59	The companions of the heaven will say: "We do not have except for our first death, and we will not be punished."
37.60	"It is indeed a grand victory!"
37.61	So, let the strivers strive for the like of this.
37.62	Is this a grand feast? Or the 'tree of torment'?
37.63	We indeed have made it a test unto the wicked.
37.64	Surely, it is a tree issuing from the base of hell.
37.65	Its spathes are as the heads of shaitans.
37.66	They eat of it, and of it fill their bellies.
37.67	Then indeed, they will have scalding water to drink.
37.68	Then their return is surely unto hell.
37.69	They indeed found their fathers in error;
37.70	But they hastened only in their path.
37.71	And before this, most people were astray.
37.72 	And We did send warners amongst them.
37.73	Lo, and behold the end of the warned!
37.74	But those pure and obedient-serving,
37.75	And Nuh, looked up to us, and We are the best in answering to the caller.
37.76	So, We saved him and his family from a grievous distress.
37.78	And, We left for him among the generations to come.
37.79	May Peace be upon Nuh from the Universes.(579)
37.80	Thus do We certainly recompense the good-doers.
37.81	He indeed was among the believing servants.
37.82	Then We drowned the rest.
37.83	Surely Ibrahim was of those who followed him.
37.84	When he came to his God with pure heart:
37.85	He said to his father and his people: "What is that ye worship?"
37.86	"Do you desire false-gods but Allah?"
37.87	"If so, what do you think of the God of the worlds?"
37.88	Later, he pondered over the stars.(580)
37.89	He said, "I am indeed unwell!"
37.90	So they turned away from him.
37.91	Then he drew near to their gods and said, "Will ye not eat?"
37.92	"What ails you that ye speak not?"
37.93	Then he turned upon then smiting them with his right hand.
37.94	They hastened towards him.
37.95	He said, "Do you serve these which you hew?"
37.96	"Allah created you and that you did."
 37.97	They said, "Build for him a burning furnace and fling him in it."
37.98	They plotted against him, but We disgraced them.
37.99	And he said, "I will go to my God, and He will surely guide me."
37.100	"My God, grant me of the righteous."
37.101	So We greeted him with a forbearing son.
37.102	Then when he grew with him reaching his age, he said, "My dear son, I indeed saw in my dream, I sacrifice you; so bethink ye!" "My dear father, do what you shall do; Allah willing, you will see me of the patient ones."
37.103	So, in their submission, when he lay his son prone for the sacrifice, -
37.104	We called out: "O, Ibrahim!"
37.105	"Verily you  have completed the vision; thus do We recompense those who do good."
37.106	Verily that was a manifest trial.
37.107	And We compensated him with a magnificent sacrifice.
37.108	And We left for him among the generations to come.
37.109	Peace be upon Ibrahim!
37.110	Even so do We recompense the good-doers.
37.111	Verily, he is among Our believing servants.
37.112	And We gave glad tidings of Ishaq, a Prophet, of the righteous.
37.113	And We blessed him, and Ishaq; and, among their descendants are the good-doers; and those who wrong themselves, manifestly.
37.114	And verily, We blessed Musa and Harun.
37.115	We saved them and their people from the grave distress.
37.116	And We helped them that they became victors.
37.117	And We gave them the manifest Book.
37.118	And We guided them.
37.119	And We left for them among the generations to come.
37.120	Peace be upon Musa and Harun.
37.121	Thus do We recompense the good-doers.
37.122	Verily, they were of Our believing servants.
37.123	And Ilyas indeed is among Our Messengers.
37.124	When he said to his people, "Will you not fear?"
37.125	"Do you call upon Ba'l abandoning the Best of the Creators?"
37.126	"Allah is He, who created you and your fathers of the yore."
37.127	But they belied him; so they will be brought forth.
37.128	Except the devout servants of Allah.
37.129	And We left for him among the generations behind.
37.130	Peace be upon Ilyas!
37.131	Thus do We reward the good-doers.
37.132	He indeed is among Our believing servants.
37.133	And Lut was certainly a messenger.
37.134	We saved him and all his family, -
37.135	Except the old woman among them who stayed behind.
37.136	Then We destroyed the rest.
37.137	And you walk on them in the morning hours.(581)
37.138	And in the night - then, will you not mind?
37.139	And Yunus - he indeed was among the messengers.
37.140	When he slipped into the laden ship;(582)
37.141	Then he drew lots and was of the losers.
37.142	And a whale swallowed him, while he was blameworthy.
37.143	And had he not been focussing on Allah more than ever,
37.144	He would have tarried in its belly till the day of raising up.
37.145	And We cast him on the plains while he was still 'dis-eased'(583)
37.147	Then We sent him to a hundred thousand, or more.
37.148	And they believed; so We made them taste the good for a period.
37.149	Say to them: "Daughters for your God and sons for you?"
37.150	"Or have We created the angels as females? Or, are they the witness?"
37.151	Know ye: they speak of their imagination!
37.152	Liars are they who say, "Allah has begotten."
37.153	Has He chosen daughters to sons?
37.154	What ails you? How ye judge?
37.155	Will you then not reason?
37.156	Or have ye a manifest proof?
37.157	Bring your proof if you speak truly.
37.158	And they create relationship between Allah and the jinns, but they know the jinns also shall be brought.
37.159	Most Pure is He, above that they describe.
37.160	Except the devout servants of Allah.
37.161	Therefore, ye and all that ye worship;
37.162	You cannot mislead him;
37.163	Save them who are bound for hell.
37.164	There is none of us without an assigned place.
37.165	Indeed we are the rangers.
37.166	And We are they that Glorify Him.
37.167	And verily they were saying:
37.168	"If only we had received a Sign from our fathers -
37.169	"We would have surely been Allah's sincere servants."
37.170	But they do deny it - soon they will know.
37.171	Our word had indeed gone forth before, to the serving messengers.
37.172	Assuredly they shall be helped.
37.173	And Our hosts! Surely they shall succeed.
37.174	So, stay away from them for a period.
37.175	Behold thee! Lo, they behold too!
37.176	Do they hasten for our torment?
37.177	When it descends in their midst, - what an evil dawn will it be of the warned!
37.178	So, stay away from them for a period.
37.179	Behold thee! Lo,they behold too.
37.180	Exalted high is your God above what they describe.
37.181	And Peace be upon The Messengers.
37.182	Glory be to Allah, the God of the worlds.


Chapter 38
Saad

38.1	Saad - O, the Forbearing! By the Quran, the complete reminder!(584)
38.2	But the deniers are in pride and dissent.
38.3	How many a nation have We destroyed before! Then their cries gave them no time to escape.
38.4	And they were surprised that a Warner came to them from them. The deniers said, "He is a sorcerer, lying."
38.5	"Has he made all gods as One God? Verily, this is surprising!"
38.6	"Go and be staunch to your gods! Surely in this, there is a design."
38.7	"We have not heard of this in any community; this is pure invention!"
38.8	"Is it upon him among us the Revelation has been sent down?" "Nay, they doubt about My Revelation! Nay, they had not tasted My torment."(585)
38.9	Or have they the treasuries of the Grace your God, the Exalted, the Abundant in providing?
38.10	Or do they rule the heavens, the earth and that in between? If so let them ride out.
38.11	But the host here are of those defeated there.
38.12	Denied before them are the people of Nuh; and, Aad and Firaun, he of the tent pegs.
38.13	And their bands are the Samud, the folks of Lut and the dwellers of the gardens.
38.14    	Not one, but denied the Messengers, so My torment was sure.
38.15	And they await not, but one blast and there will be no delay in it.
38.16	And they say, "Our God! Hasten on us our share before the Day of Reckoning."
38.17	Endure what they say; and, remember Our servant Dawood. He indeed always looked up to us.
38.18	Indeed, We subjected to him the mountains; they praised the glory of Allah with him at nightfall and sunrise.
38.19	And gathered the birds - all looked up to Him.
38.20	And We strengthened his Kingdom, and gave him the Wisdom and Clear Signs.
38.21	Did you received the news of the disputants? When they entered his privacy, -
38.22    	When they entered his seclusion, he was taken by the scare. Then they said, "Fear not! We are disputants; one of us has transgressed upon the other; so judge aright between us; be not unjust, and guide us to the right path."
38.23	"He indeed is my brother; he has ninety-nine sheep. But with me I have one sheep; but he, by his argument has won over me to put it in his custody."
38.24    	"Verily by asking you to add your sheep to his sheep, he has wronged you. And, many intermixed do wrong one another except those who believe and are righteous - they are very few." But when Dawood realised We had tested him, he turned to his God in repentance, subdued.
38.25	So We forgave him that, and surely with Us is the nearest and beautiful place for him.
38.26	"O Dawood! Surely We made you the viceroy in the earth. So judge justly amongst the people; and, follow not pride. It will cast you away from Allah's Way. Those who deviate from Allah's path as castaways, for them indeed, is a severe torment for having forgotten the Day of Reckoning." 
38.27	And We had not created the heaven and the earth and everything in between for waste; such is the thought of the disbelievers. Woe of the fire upon the disbelievers.
38.28	Or would We make the right doers as the corruptors on the earth? Or would We make pious as the sinners?
38.29	We have bestowed upon you the Blessed Book that they ponder its Signs, and that the men of understanding shall reflect.
38.30	And We gave Dawood, Sulaiman - a glorious servant. Verily, he was ever turning!
38.31	When the standing steeds were presented to him at eventide,
38.32	He said, "Lo, I have preferred the good things to the remembrance of my God until the sun was bidden behind the veil."
38.33	"Bring them back to me!" He then began to stroke their shanks and necks.
38.34	And We did test Sulaiman harshly; We threw the dead, on to his throne. So he turned.(586)
38.35	He said, "My God! Forgive me! Grant me a Kingdom that none shall aspire after me; verily, You are the Bestower!"(587)
38.36	So We made the air subservient to him; it carried to his destinations at ease, by his will.
38.37	And, every builder from shaitans, and the divers as well;
38.38	And others, chained;-
38.39	"Our Bestow, this - give or withhold, without a questioning."
38.40	And surely with Us for him, a near and a beautiful dwelling.
38.41	And remember Our servant, Ayyub: He said to his God, "Verily, shaitan has given me anguish and torment."
38.42    	"Tap with your foot! Here is the freshness for the bathing and a drink."
38.43	Then as a Mercy from Us and a reflection for the men of understanding, -  We gave him his family, and added at that.
38.44	"And have a handful and strike with it - break not your oath." We saw him, enduring; and, an excellent servant - surely, he was ever turning to us.(588)
38.45	And remember Our servants Ibrahim, Ishaq and Yaqub, the men of Might and Insight.
38.46	We indeed purified them with a pure quality, to mind their abode.
38.47	And assuredly with Us, they are of the chosen people, outstanding.
38.48	And remember Ismail, Alyasavu, Zulqifl - all are of the good standing.
38.49	This, a glad tiding! Surely, for the pious is a beautiful abode.
38.50	For them will be kept open the gates of the Paradise, Adhnu.
38.51	Reclining on it - and they will ask for fruits and drinks in plenty.
38.52	With them will be companions who guard the gaze and of the same age.
38.53	This, the promise, given to you for the Day of Reckoning.
38.54	Verily, this is Our gift; and, there is no end to it.
38.55	This - but to the wicked, surely the most evil is their abode.
38.56	The Hell - therein they will enter; what an evil resting place!
38.57	This - so, let them taste it; scalding water and pus.
38.58	And countless more like this.
38.59	And such is the army, enter hustling in with you; no welcome for them; surely they shall burn in the Fire.
38.60    	They would say, "Nor ye, no welcome for you; you forwarded it for us; so wretched is the abode."
38.61	They would say, "Our God, whoever have forwarded this to us, double their punishment in the Fire."(589)
38.62	And they would say, "What ails us? Why do we not see those whom we counted among the wicked?"
38.63	"Did we take them for a mockery? Or has our vision swerved away from them?"
38.64	Indeed, this is the truth; the disputing of the dwellers of the Fire.
38.65	Say: "I am but a Warner. There is no God but Allah, the One, the Omnipotent."
38.66	"He is the God of the heavens and the earth and all in between. He is All-Mighty, All-Forgiving."
38.67	Say: "This is the Most Blessed Revelation.
38.68	"But you keep ignoring."
38.69	"I know nothing of what the exquisites exchanged."
38.70	"The Wahy was indeed not sent to me except that I warn you openly."
38.71	When your God said to the angels, "Verily, I am going to create humanity from clay -"
38.72	And when I Perfect him with My Ruh, to the Stature, obey him."
38.73	Then the angels fell in obedience - all of them.
38.74	Except Iblis, he was proud and became of the disbelievers.
38.75	"O Iblis! What prevented you from obeying him whom I have perfected with My Wisdom? Do you boast? Or have you become lofty?"
38.76	He said, "I am above him; You created me from the Fire, but him, out of clay."
38.77	"Go ye out of here because you are an outcast."
38.78	"And My curse will be on you until the Day of Reckoning."(590)
38.79	He said, "My God, respite me until the Day they are raised up."
38.80	He said, "You are among those respited!"
38.81	"Until the Hour, fixed!"
38.82	Then he said, "By Thy Glory, I will surely lead them all astray!"
38.83    "Except Thy servants, pure for Thee."
38.84	God said, "That is the Truth, and I say the Truth."
38.85	"Surely, I will fill up the Hell with you and all of them who followed you.'
38.86	Say, "I ask you of no wages for this, nor do I put you to stress."
38.87	"This is no less than a Revelation for the people of the worlds."
38.88	"By the Time! Verily, you will know the Truth of This."




Chapter 39
The Crowds
				   		   			  
39.1	This Revelation has been sent down from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise.
39.2    	Verily, We have sent down this Revelation upon you in Truth. So, strive for purity at heart, turning to Allah.
39.3	Know that that Allah's is the Pure Way. And those who take besides Allah as helpers say: "We worship them not but they would bring us nearer to Allah." Allah will indeed judge between them about that which they differ; verily, Allah will not guide he who lies, denying.
39.4	Had Allah wished for a son He would have chosen so from His creations; He is the Most Pure. He is the One God, the Almighty.
39.5	He created the heavens and the earth in Truth. He covers the day about the night and wraps the night about the day; and, subjected the sun and the moon. Each moves according to the time prescribed for it. Allah is Mighty, Forgiving.
39.6	He created you from the Soul, and from it, He made your companion. And He produced for you of the cattle eight kinds. He formed you in your mothers' wombs, and that He conceives you in three darkness, one creation after the other. He is your God. And to Him is the Command. There is no God but He. How then are you turned away?
39.7    	If you turn away - Allah indeed, is Needless of you; but Allah is not satisfied with His servants about their turning away. Therefore, He will be appreciative if you show thanks. And the bearer of the burden will not bear the load of another; then your return is to your God; then He will inform you what you used to do. Lo! He knows what is in the breasts.  
39.8	And if any affliction touches man, He turns to his God and calls only Him; then, when He grants from Him a good, he forgets that for whatever he had called upon Him; he creates associates to Allah and prevents from the path of Allah. Say, "Enjoy for a time with your ingratitude; indeed, you are the companions of Hell."
39.9	Is he equal to - the one, who fears His God concerning his next life, surrendering to God steadfast during the night, trusting His Mercy? Say, "Are the men of understanding and the ignorants the same? Verily, the knowing are those who ponder."
39.10	Say, "O the believing servants! Fear your God. There is goodly wage in this world for those who do good. Allah's earth is plentiful; the enduring ones will indeed receive their reward in abundance."
39.11	Say, "Verily, I am ordained to look up to Allah with purity at heart for the guidance."
39.12	Say, "I am called to serve for the Peace, wilfully, first hand."
39.13    	Say, "I surely fear for a mighty day of the torment if I wrong my God."
39.14	Say, "I soulfully call upon Allah for my life."
39.15    	Say, "But you keep worshiping as per your desires; surely the worst losers are they who bring upon them and their family a great loss, in the End."
39.16	Over and below them will be the sheets of fire. Allah warns His servants thus: "My Servants! Fear Me."
39.17	The Blessing is upon those who avoid and keep off from shaitans and turn to Allah, surrendering. So, give good news to My servants.
39.18	They listen to the speeches and follow the Truth in it. Allah guides only such. They are the people of understanding.
39.19	Upon whom the word of punishment has come true, then can you save he, who is in the Fire?
39.20	But whoso fear God, they will have lofty mansions below which the rivers flow - Allah's Promise. Allah fails not His promise.
39.21	Beheld not thee? Allah sends down water from the heaven and makes it run as springs; then He brings forth thereof grains in various hues. Soon you find them becoming dry and yellow; then, He makes them chaff. Verily, in it is the Sign for the people of remembrance.
39.22    	Him, whose breasts Allah has expanded for the peaceful life is in the Light of his God. And woe to those whose hearts have hardened against the remembrance of Allah - those are in manifest error.
39.23	Allah has sent down the Book having beautiful hadiths; they testify one another, inspiring perpetual remembrance. Whoever fear their God, their skins quiver; then their skins and their hearts become tender to Allah's remembrance - Allah's Way, this. With this Allah guides whom He Will. But whoso Allah leaves astray, there is none to guide him.
39.24	He who strives saving his face from the horrible punishment of the Judgement Day - and, to the wicked ones, it will be said, "Taste what you earned!"
39.25	Those before them denied, and therefore the torment came upon them from whence they were not aware.
39.26    	Thus Allah made them taste humiliation in this world, and the torment of the Hereafter is much greater - if only they knew.
39.27	And indeed, We have set forth every example in this Quran for the humanity to reflect.
39.28	In the Arabic tongue, this Quran, without corruptness - that they may guard.
39.29	Allah coins a similitude: a slave owned by many masters at variance with one another, and a man exclusively at the service of one man - are the two equal in comparison? All dignity be to God, but most of them do not know.
39.30	Indeed ye will die, and surely, they will die.
39.31    	Then, on the last day, surely you will put forth excuses before your God.
39.32	So, who is greater in wickedness than he who lies against Allah, and dismisses the Truth when it came to them?
39.33	And he who brought the Truth and those accepting the Truth - are the God fearing.
39.34	For them with their God, is what they wish; this is the reward of the righteous.
39.35	Allah will remove the worst of their evil deeds from them - and, grant them the best reward for the fair things they used to do.
39.36	Does Allah suffices not for His servants? And they threaten you with that besides Allah; and, whomever Allah has left astray, there is none to guide him.
39.37	And whomever Allah guides, none shall misguide him. Is not Allah All-Powerful, Avenging?
39.38	If you ask them, "Who created the heavens and the earth," they would inevitably say, "The none but the One!" Say: "Beheld thee, if the 'none but the One - Allah' has decreed an affliction upon me, can those you call besides Allah deliver me? Or, if He grants me a favour, will they be able to prevent His grace?" And say: "Allah suffices me; in Him, do the trusting put their trust."
39.39	Say: "O my people! Do what you would do, and indeed I do too; so, soon you will know."
39.40	"To whom the torment will come? And upon whom will the eternal affliction descend?"
39.41	We indeed have sent down this blessed Book upon you; so, whoever takes to righteousness, it is for him; and, whoever errs, he errs only to his peril; and, you are not a protector over them.
39.42	Allah captures the lives - when they die, and that which would not die, in their sleep; then He withholds that upon which the death is decreed, and sends back the rest to complete their term. Verily, in this are the Signs for those who reflect.
39.43	Or do they take for intercessors besides Allah? Say: "What! Even though they do not possess any power or knowledge?"
39.44	Say: "Allah's is all intercession; to Him belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth; then your return is unto Him."
39.45	And when 'Allah!' is mentioned alone, those whose hearts do not believe in the Lasting Day, shrink in aversion; but when those beside Him is mentioned, behold, they are glad.
39.46	Say: "O Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the earth! The Knower of the Secrets and the Evident. Judge among your servants concerning what they dispute."
39.47	And, even if with the wicked is the possession of all things on the earth, and the likeness thereof, surely, they would give them away to ransom them from the severe chastisement on the Day of Judgement. And there would appear to them from Allah that which they could never have counted upon.
39.48	And there would appear to them the evils they had earned; and, that with which they used to mock at would encompass them.	
39.49    	When an evil encompasses the man, he only calls Us; but then, when We favoured him a boon from Us, he says, "This is due to me on account of my knowledge!" Nay! It is but a test - but most of them will not comprehend.
39.50	Thus said those before them, but whatever they earned availed them nought.
39.51    	So, the evil they had earned smote them; and, of them, to the unjust, their evil would reach them fast; and, they will not be able to avert.
39.52	Do they not see Allah indeed expands the provisions to whom He wills and shrinks to whom He wills? In it are sure Signs for the believers.
39.53	Say: "My servants! Despair not of Allah's Mercy, even though you had committed excesses on yourself - surely, Allah is Oft-Returning, Most Merciful."
39.54	So, turn to your God and surrender to Him, before the affliction comes upon you; then, you will not be helped.
39.55	And before the torment comes upon you of a sudden, when you are unaware, follow the beautiful things bestowed upon you from your God. 
39.56	Lest you should say, "O woe unto me for not being mindful in my duty to Allah; and, I was indeed among the scoffers!"
39.57	Or, lest it should say, "Had Allah shown me the Way, I too would have been of the God-fearing."
39.58	Or, lest it should say on seeing the punishment, "If only I find a way out, I will be of the righteous."
39.59	"Verily My Signs came to you; but you were proud, rejecting them; and, you were of the unbelievers."
39.60	And on the Day of the Reckoning you will find the faces of those who lied against God blackened. Is there not in hell the abode for the Haughty?
39.61	Allah delivers those who are God-fearing with victory; no harm shall touch them, nor would they grieve. 
39.62	It is Allah who Originates all things, and He is the Protector over all things.
39.63	And with Allah is the keys of the heavens and the earth. So, the losers are those who disbelieve in the Signs of Allah.
39.64	Say, "O Ignorant! Do you command that I worship that which are not Allah?"
39.65	And what is revealed to you and those before you is, 'if you associate partners - your toiling will surely fail, and you will be among the losers.'
39.66	So, turn to Allah and be among the thankful.
39.67	And they have not regarded Allah with Truthful regard; and, on the Hour, the earth will be in His grip; and all the heavens will be under His Order. He is High above all that they associate.
39.68	When the call is given, at that, those in the heavens and on the earth will faint save whom Allah willed; when there comes the call again, lo, they shall stand up, beholding.
39.69	And the earth will shine with the Light of its God, and the Record will be placed; and, the Prophets and the witnesses will be brought - and, the judgement will be just between them. And, they will not be wronged. 
39.70	Each one will be recompensed for what he has wrought; and, He knows well their deeds.
39.71	The disbelievers will be dragged to the Hell as combines and as communes; when they come to it, its gates will be opened. The guards would say to them: "Haven't there been the Messengers from amongst you exemplifying your God's Signs, and warning about this Day of assemblage? They would say: "Yes." But the Truth, the word of Doom, has come upon the disbelievers.
39.72	It will be said, "Enter the gates of the Hell and abide therein." Evil is the abode of those who waxed proud."
39.73	And those who feared their God would be led to paradise in companies; and when they come thither, its gates will be opened; and, its keepers will say to them: "Peace be upon you; so enter ye, into it and abide therein forever."
39.74	To this they would say, "All Praise be unto Allah! He made true His promise to us and to make us go about in the paradise wherever wished to, He made us the inheritors of the earth." So, the recompense of the righteous is blessed.
39.75	And the Angels - you will find the Angels Praise their God and glorify His Purity while they surround every Wisdom of the Universe. Then the judgement will be pronounced between them with justness. It will be said, "Glory be to Allah, the God of the Worlds."
	

Chapter 40
The Giver of Belief

40.1	Ha Meem.(591)
40.2	This is the Book revealed by Allah, the All-Mighty, All-Knowing.
40.3    	Forgiver of sins, Accepter of penitence, Severe in Punishing and Merciful. There is no God, but He; and, to Him is the final return.
40.4	Save he who denies - shall not dispute concerning the Signs of Allah; therefore, let not their pride in the cities delude you.
40.5	Before them denied the people of Nuh, and the following generations; and, to corner the Messenger who came to them, every nation disputed against the truth with the falsehood. But I seized them; how then was My punishment?
40.6	And thus the promise of your God has come upon the unbelievers as the companions of Fire.
40.7	Those who bear the wisdom of the Universe and those who encompass it, praise their God and glorify His Purity. They seek forgiveness for the believers while they believed in Him. "Our God! You surround everything by Your Grace and Wisdom; so, bestow Your Mercy upon whoever follow Your Way, repenting. And, deliver them from the punishment of Hell!"
40.8	"My God! Make them, and of their parents, and of their wives, and of their descendants and those who do good - enter the Paradise of Adhnu, the eternal abode You had promised them;  verily, You are the Mighty, the Wise."
40.9	"And deliver them from the evils of that Day; and, he whom You would save on that Day, You have taken him to Mercy - and, that is a great victory."
40.10	It will indeed be said to the unbelievers, "Allah's wrath on you is much greater than your anger on you; for, you denied when you were called to the belief."
40.11	They would say, "Our God, You caused us to die twice and raised us up twice. So, we accept our wrongs - is there a way out?"(592)
40.12	"This is because, when you were called to, 'the Only God!' you disbelieved; but when partners were joined to Him, then you believed. So, this decree is from the Most High, the Grand."
40.13	He shows you His Signs; He sends down all your provisions from the heaven - so, none shall reflect, except he who turns to Allah alone.(593)
40.14	So, though the unbelievers hate, steadfastly call upon Allah with the sincere remembrance of Him.
40.15	The Exalter in ranks; the possessor of the Seat. It is He who sends His command through inspiration upon whom He will of his slaves, to warn them of the Day of Meeting..
40.16	On that Day they would rush forth; none of their matters will hide from Allah. Whose is the Kingdom today? To Allah, the One, the Subduing.
40.17	This Day each will get their recompense for what they earned; no wrong today; surely, Allah is severe in Reckoning.
40.18	And warn them the Day is near; on that Hour when their hearts fill with grief and choke their throats, for the wicked, there will not be a sympathising friend, nor would there be one for him, with acceptable intercession.
40.19	He Knows well their treacherous eyes and the secrecies in their mind.
40.20	And Allah judges with Truth, and those who call besides Allah will not judge a thing. Allah indeed is the Hearing, the Seeing. 
40.21    	Beheld not they travelling on the earth and saw the end of those before them? They were greater than them in strength and left firmer traces on the land. But Allah seized them in their ill-deeds, and there was none to save them from Allah.
40.22	This - verily, their messengers came to them with clear Signs; but they denied them. So, Allah seized them. He is All-Powerful, Severe in Retribution.
40.23	And We indeed sent Musa with Our Signs and a clear Warrant.
40.24	To Firaun, Haman and Qarun - but they did say, "A sorcerer! A liar!"
40.25	When he brought them the Truth from Us, they said, "Kill the sons of those who believed with him, and leave their daughters alive." So, the plans of the disbelievers are not but in error.
40.26    	And Firaun said, "Leave me the killing of Musa; and, let him call His God. Surely I fear, he would change your way, or that he should cause chaos in the land."
40.27	Musa said, "I surely seek refuge in my God and your God from every arrogant disbeliever in the Day of judgement."
40.28    	And a believer in the tribe of Firaun, who was hiding his belief said, "Will you kill a person because he says, 'My God is Allah'? And verily, he has brought you from your God, clear Signs; therefore, if he is a liar, upon him is his lie; but if he has spoken the Truth, then certain of what he has promised would come upon you. Allah indeed, will not guide a transgressing liar."
40.29	"O my people! Today the kingdom is yours, and you are mighty; but, who is our helper, if Allah's punishment has come upon us?" Said Firaun, "I show you the straight path; and, I show not the way except what is right."
40.30	And he who believed said, "O my people! I certainly fear for you like the days of the parties."
40.31	"The like of that befell the people of Nuh, and Aad and Samud - and their generations. But Allah wills not wrong for His bondmen."
40.32	And, "O my people! I fear for you the Hour of summoning!"
40.33	"The Hour of your retreating, when there is no protector for you from Allah; and, whoever Allah has left astray, there is none to guide him."
40.34    	And, "Yusuf came to you with clear Signs before; but you doubted that which he brought to you until when he died. And you said, "After him, Allah will never send a Messenger." Thus Allah sends the prodigal and the doubter, astray."
40.35	It is most hateful in the eyes of Allah, and the believers to dispute the Signs of Allah without a clear proof. Thus Allah seals the heart of every proud and haughty. 
40.36	And Firaun said, "O Haman! Construct for me a high tower - so, I would reach the ways!"
40.37	Firaun said, "The ways of the heavens - so that I would see Musa's God; and I surely think he lies." Thus were the evil deeds of Firaun, made fair seem to him; he was prevented from the way; and, Firaun's plot did not end but in ruin. 
40.38	And he who believed said, "O my people! Follow me; I will show you the Straight Path."
40.39    "O my people! A mean is the pleasure of this life, but the Hereafter is the eternal abode!"
40.40	"Whoever does ill-deed, he will not be recompensed except with the like of it; and, whoever of a male or a female, believes and does good, will enter the heaven. There, their needs will be fulfilled."
40.41	"O my people! How is it with me? I call you to salvation, but you call me to the Fire."
40.42	"You call me to deny Allah and that I associate partners with Him whereof I have no knowledge; but I call you to the All-Mighty, the Most Forgiving."
40.43	"Towards whatsoever you call me, it is unfit to be called upon now or ever; and, we surely will return to Allah. Verily the transgressors remain the companions of Hell."
40.44	"So you will soon know what I say; and, I entrust my affair with Allah. Allah indeed is Ever-Seeing of His servants."
40.45	So, We delivered him from their planned plot; and, the evil of the torment surrounded the people of Firaun.
40.46	They will be exposed to the Fire, morning and evening - and, on the Hour, lasting - it will be said, "Thrust the folks of Firaun into the most terrible chastisement."
40.47	And, when they wrangle in the Fire, - the oppressed people would say to the transgressors, "We were surely a people, following you; so, will you remove the least part of this fire from us?"
40.48	The transgressors will say, "We are all in this; Allah indeed has judged between His servants."
40.49	The inhabitants of the fire would say to the keepers of the hell, "Seek from your God to  reduce this suffering for us a little, for one day."
40.50	They will say, "Haven't your messengers come to you with clear proofs?" They will say, "O yes, undoubtedly!" They will say, "If so, seek yourselves." But the prayers of the unbelievers is not but in error."
40.51	Certainly We will help Our messengers and the believers in this world and on the Hour of the establishment of the witnesses.
40.52	On that Day, the excuses of the transgressors will avail them nought; and they will have the curse, and an evil resting place.
40.53	Indeed, We gave Musa the Straight Path; and, We made the descendants of Israel, inherit the Scripture.
40.54	It was a Guidance, and a clear Revelation to those who mind.
40.55	So remain patient; surely Allah's word is the Truth. Seek forgiveness for your deeds; and, Praise your God's Purity in the evening and the morning. 
40.56	Verily, those who argue concerning the Signs of Allah without proof, have nothing but pride in their breasts; but they do not attain it. Seek refuge then, in Allah; indeed, He is Hearing, Seeing.
40.57	Surely the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of man; yet, most of the people would not know.
40.58	Those who have the external sight and those with insight are not the same; likewise, the believing good doers and the evil doers are not equal. But a few of you, mind not.
40.59	The Time will come, and there is no doubt in it - but most people do not welcome it.
40.60	Your God says: Call unto Me; I will Answer. Whoever is boastful, unmindful of Me, shall enter the Hell, despised.
40.61	Allah created the night for you to rest therein, and the day for your eyesight; Allah ever blesses the humans - but most people do not give thanks.
40.62	He is Allah, your God - the Originator of all creations; there is no God but He. So, whither are you turned to?
40.63	Thus were the people who were denying the Signs of Allah, turned away.
40.64	It is Allah who had made this earth the dwelling place; and, the sky, a protective cover. And He created you, perfected you and measured your provisions in full - He is Allah! Most Blessed is Allah, your God, and the God of the worlds.
40.65	He is the Originator of life; there is no God but He - so, turn unto Him and look forward to Him alone; all glory be to the God of the worlds.
40.66	Say: "When the clear Signs of my God has come to me, I am indeed forbidden to call upon that which you worship beside Allah; and, I am commanded to surrender only to the God of the worlds."
40.67	He Originated you from the sand; then from a drop; then from the cluster - then brings you forth as an infant. Then you grow into maturity and reach old age; some die before this - yet, each has an appointed term - that you may give thought.
40.68	He Originates life; He causes death. So, when He Intends to Originate, He has to say to it is, 'Be!' And it is.
40.69	Have you not seen those who dispute Our Signs? How are they turned away?
40.70	Whoever denies the Book and that with which We sent Our Messengers, will soon know.
40.71    	They will be dragged with the fetters and chains around their necks;
40.72	through the Scalding water, and then into the Fire.
40.73	Then it will be said to them: "Where are the partners you associated?"
40.74	They will say, "Except Allah, - they had vanished from Us; and, We had not been calling them before!" Thus Allah sends astray, the unbelievers.
40.75	This is for your unjust rejoicing in the land, with arrogance. 
40.76	Enter the gates of the Hell to dwell therein forever; thus, evil is the resting-place of the Haughty.
40.77	So, have patience! Verily, Allah's word is True. Whether We show you certain of Our Promise or We cause you to die before it, it is to Us they shall return.
40.78	And indeed, We had sent before you the Messengers. We have revealed the histories of some to you; and, there are the Messengers whose histories We had not narrated to you. No Messenger shall bring any Sign of Allah but by His Leave; so, when Allah's command comes, the justice will prevail. And, on the Hour, the liars are to lose.
40.79	Allah has created the cattle for you - on some, you ride; and, you eat of it.
40.80	And in them are the uses for you; and, you are carried on them and on the ships to fulfil the needs of your hearts.
40.81	And He shows you His Signs; so, which of Allah's Signs will you deny?
40.82	Beheld not they travelling on the earth and saw the end of those before them? They were greater than them in strength and left firmer traces on the land. However, whatever they earned did not benefit them.
40.83	So, when their Messenger came to them with Clear Signs, they exulted only in the knowledge they possessed; and, whatever they mocked at, encompassed them.
40.84	So, when they saw Our torment, said: "We believe only in Allah; and, deny what we used to associate with Him."
40.85	However, their belief when they saw Our torment, did not avail them; the wont of Allah ever touching His bondmen. And then, the disbelievers are lost.
		
Chapter 41
The Surrendering

41.1	Ha Meem(594)
41.2	This has been sent down from the Most Benevolent, Most Merciful.
41.3	The wisdom of this Quran, given in the 'Arabic,' is made clear for the thoughtful.
41.4	As giver of Glad tiding and a Warner; but most of them ignore; and, they behold not! 
41.5	And, they said, "Our hearts are closed to where you call us; and, there is deafness in the ears; and, a veil is there between us and you. So, act; we indeed, are acting." 
41.6	Say, "I am a mortal like you - but Inspiration is being given to me; surely, your God is One; so, stand steadfast for Him alone. And, seek His Forgiveness; and, woe to the associators."  
41.7	Those who do not spend for purification; and, they are the disbelievers in the Hereafter.   
41.8	Those who believe and do good works, to them will be the lasting recompense. 
41.9	Say, "Is it you who associate partners, denying He who created the earth in two days? He is the God of the Universes."
41.10	He planted on it from above, the mountains, firm; and, He blessed it; and, on it, He perfected their provisions in four days - in the required measure.
41.11	Then He willed to create, when the sky was smoky - so, He said to it and the earth, "Come ye together, willingly or unwillingly!" They both said, "We have come, in willing obedience!"
41.12	So, He made it into seven firmaments in two days; and, inspired in each firmament its duties; and, We decked the nether sky with the stars, and rendered it inviolable; it is prepared by the All-Mighty, the All-Knowing.
41.13	So, if they reject, say, "I warn you that you may be seized by a seizure of thunder blasts as Aad and Samud were seized."
41.14	When the Messengers came to them from before and behind them saying, "Call not upon anything other than Allah," they said, "If our God had willed, He would have sent down the Angels; so, we certainly reject that with which you were sent."(595)
41.15    	And on the land, the unjustly arrogant people of Aad said, "Who is mightier than us?" Lo! Beheld not they, that Allah, their creator - is surely Mightier than them? And they were people who continually denied Our Signs.
41.16	So, to make them taste a disparaging chastisement in the days of their worst adversities We sent against them a tempest; and, the punishment in the Hereafter will be even more humiliating.
41.17	And as for Samud, We guided them; but they preferred blindness to the Guidance. So, the disgracing torment of thunderbolt overtook them for what they earned.
41.18	But We delivered those who believed and feared their God.
41.19		And the enemies of Allah will be assembled in rows on the Day when they are gathered to the Fire.
41.20	Finally, when they reach their Hour - their ears, their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do.
41.21	And they will say to their skins, "Why did you testify against us?" They will say, "Allah, the God who makes everything speak, caused us talk. He created you in the first, and you are returned unto Him."
41.22	"And you did not conceal to your ears, eyes and skins, that they could not bear witness against you. And, you thought Allah would not know much of what you do."
41.23	And, this imagination you assumed of your God has destroyed you, and so you have become among the losers. 
41.24	So, Fire is their dwelling place, even though they are patient nor will they be forgiven despite their seeking.
41.25	We have joined companions with them; they made beautiful to them what is before and after them - affirmed is Our Word, upon the Jinn and the men who passed on before. Lo, they were ever losers.
41.26	The disbelievers said, "Give not ears to this Quran! Cause chaos and confusion in it; so, you will prevail."
41.27	So, We will make the disbelievers taste the severest torment - for, We will reward them for the most evil of their deeds.
41.28	That is the reward for the enemies of Allah - the Fire! In it is the eternal dwelling for their denial of Our Straight Path.
41.29	And the disbelievers would say, "God! Show us those of the Jinns and humans who misguided us; we will bring them low, and below our feet."
41.30	Surely, those who say, "Our God is Allah, and endure," Verily, the angels descend on them saying, "Fear not, nor worry - Enjoy, the good tidings in the Promised Paradise!"
41.31	"We are your Helpers in this world and the next. And, therein is whatever you Will, and all that you wish for."
41.32	 A Grace from from the Forgiving, the Merciful.
41.33	And, "Who says fairer than he, who calls people to Allah, and says, "I am of those who wish Peace," while being righteous himself? 
41.34	Not equal are the righteousness and wrong; prevent the evil with the righteousness! Then between whom and you was enmity, becomes as though he is a bosom friend. 
41.35	But none will attain it save those who keep patience; and, except the highness, none shall possess it.(596)
41.36	And, whenever you are aware of any inducement from Shaitan, turn to Allah, at once. Verily, He is Hearing, Knowing.(597)
41.37	And the night and the day, and the sun and the moon are among His Signs; so, if you are people who call upon Allah, never worship the sun and the moon. But surrender to Allah, the Creator.
41.38	But if they wax proud, - those with your God exalt His Purity by night and day, and they do not exhaust.
41.39    	And of His Signs are that you see the earth barren; when We send down rain on it, it quivers and grows. Surely, He Who gives life is the giver of life to the dead. Verily, He has power over all things.
41.40	Indeed, those who find a wrong in Our Signs are not hidden from Us. So who is better - he who is hurled into Fire or he who comes without fear on the Day of Reckoning? He indeed is ever Watchful over what you do.
41.41	Surely, when the Remembrance came to them, they disbelieved; indeed, it is the Book, ingrained.
41.42	Come not nigh to it a distortion from before, nor from behind it. It has been sent down from the Wise, the Most Glorious.
41.43	Nought is said to you but was indeed said to the Messengers before you; surely your God is Oft-Forgiving, Severe in Retribution.
41.44	And if We had sent down this Quran in non-Arabic, they would say: "Should its Revelation be not in the known Arabic? What! Not an Arab?" Say, "It is the Guidance and Comfort to the believers. But for the disbelievers - in their ears is the deafness; and, in them is the blindness; so, they are called to from afar."
41.45    	Verily, We gave Musa the Clear Book; but, changes were made therein. And, had there had not been a word preceded from Allah, long-settled would have been their affairs among them; and thereof, they are in grave doubt. 
41.46	Whoever is righteous, it is for his good, and whoever sins, for him is the grief; and, your God does not wrong his bondmen a bit.
41.47	He has the Wisdom of Time, And, not a fruit comes forth from its sheath without His knowledge; and, no woman conceives nor delivers. On that Day, He will say, "Where are My partners?" They will say, "We declare to you, none is here as a witness!"
41.48	And whatever they were calling before will vanish from them. So, they will know they have no refuge.
41.49	Man is not tired of asking for good; but, if a harm touches him, he despairs.
41.50	But, after his suffering, when We make him taste Our Mercy, he says, "It so happens to me; I do not think there is the Hour; and, if I am sent back to my God, I will certainly receive good from Him." "So, We will indeed inform the disbelievers what they did, and will surely make them taste a punishing chastisement."
41.51	And if We shower upon man Our Mercy, he turns away, denying. But when an evil visits him, he engages in a prolonged prayer.
41.52	"While this is from Allah, yet, if you deny - behold not thee, who is far away astray than he who is in dissension?"
41.53	We will soon show them Our Signs in Truth for sure, from all around and from within them. Does not it suffice you that your God is, over all things Ever-Watchful?
41.54	Know that they are in doubt concerning their meeting with their God. And know that He surrounds all things.


Chapter 42
The Counselling

42.1	Ha Meem(598)
42.2	Ain Seen Qaf(599)
42.3	Thus Allah sends Revelations to you and those before you through inspiration. He is the Exalted in Power, the Wise.
42.4	To Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth. He is the All-High, the All-Glorious.
42.5	The skies above may cleave asunder; but, the angels seek Forgiveness, Praising their God's Glory and Purity, for the people of the world. Lo! Surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
42.6	Those who have taken besides Allah as protectors, He keeps watch over them - you own no responsibility for them.
42.7	And thus do We inspire this Quran to you in Arabic, to warn the capital cities and the surrounding towns about the Day of the gathering of all whereof there is no doubt. Some will be in the Heavens and some in the Blazing Fire.
42.8	And had Allah willed, He would have made them a single nation; but, He admits whom He will into His Mercy. And for the unjust there is no protector nor a helper.
42.9	Or have they taken protectors other than Allah? But Allah, He is the Protector; He brings life to the dead, and He is Powerful over all things.
42.10	And the judgement concerning any of your disputes is with Allah - He is Allah, My God! I put my trust in Him and to Him I return.
42.11	He is the Originator of the heavens and the earth; and, He causes you to spread by creating your companions for you, and of the cattle their strains; there is nothing like unto Him. He is the Hearing, the Seeing. 
42.12	The Keys to the Heavens and the earth are with Him; He expands or restricts the measures of this world, for whom He wills. Indeed He is the Knower of all things.(600)
42.13	He has allowed a life for you what He has ordained upon Nuh. So, what We reveal to you, what We have revealed to Ibrahim, Musa and Isa is: "Endure in the Straight Path and deviate not away from it." To the idolaters, hard is the Path to which you call them. Allah chooses for Him, those whom He pleases, and Guides to Him, those who turn.
42.14    	But for their jealousy, they had not fallen apart after the Clear Signs came to them. Had there not been the word preceded from Allah, for a term fixed, the affairs between them surely would have been settled; and, whoever after they became the owners of the Signs of the Book, are also in the deep divide.
42.15	So, keep calling; and, stand steadfast as ordained upon you, and follow not their vanities. Say, "I believe in the God-send Scriptures; and, I am commanded to justice amongst you. Allah is Our God, and He is your God. Our deeds are for us; your deeds are for you. And there shall not be disputes between us and you; Allah will bring us together, and we are to return unto Him."
42.16	Whoever dispute about Allah after accepting Him, their argument is fruitless before their God; and, His anger will come upon them as a terrible chastisement.
42.17	Allah it is who has sent down this Book in justness and truth; and, do you know that the Hour is nigh?
42.18	Those who disbelieve in it, hasten for it; but, the believers fear it, and they are sure it is true. Lo! Those who involve in vain dispute concerning the Hour are far astray.
42.19	Allah is Ever-Gentle with His servants; He provides to whom He will. He is the Powerful, the Mighty. 
42.20	Whoso wishes for the harvest of the Hereafter, We shall increase his provisions. And whoso desires this world's harvest, We give him of it, a measure. But, he will have no portion in the Hereafter.
42.21	Or, have they partners who bid against what is forbidden by Allah? And had it not been for the Word about the judgment, the affairs between them would have been settled - surely for the unjust is a painful torment.
42.22	You will see the evildoers being afraid of what they have earned, but it will happen on them. But Paradise is the place for the believing righteous; they will receive whatever they wish for, from their God. And that is the Grand Blessing.
42.23	This is the glad tiding for His servants who believe and do good deeds. Say: "Save that you shall show mercy to the relatives - for this, I seek no wages of you!" And, whoever does a good deed, We will increase the good for him. Indeed, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, All-Appreciative.
42.24	Or that they say: "He is conjuring lies against Allah?" Had Allah willed, He would have set the seal upon your heart. And Allah eliminates the falsehood, vindicating the Truth by His Signs. Surely He is the Knower of what is in the breasts.
42.25	He accepts the repentance of His servants, and Pardons the sins; and, He knows all that you do.
42.26	And admits into His Grace those who believe and do good and increases them in it. And, as to the disbelievers, awaits a chastising doom.
42.27	And if Allah had expanded the provisions for His servants, they would transgress on the earth; so, he has prepared them in a measure as per His will. Surely, He is the Knower of His servants, being Ever-Watchful.
42.28	It is He who sends down the rain after they despair; and, He spreads well His Blessings. And He is the Protector and Praiseworthy.
42.29	In the origination of the heavens and the earth, and in the living beings being spread out in them both - therein are of His Signs; so, when He wish, He is All-Powerful to gather them. 
42.30	And the afflictions that reach you is because of what your hands have earned; but, He forgives them much.
42.31	And you cannot nullify Him on the earth; and, there is neither a Protector nor a Helper but Allah.
42.32	And of His Signs are the ships, sail like mountains in the sea.
42.33	If He so Wishes, He calms the weather and so, they are quiet on the surface; surely, in it are the Signs for the patient and the grateful ones.
42.34	Or He would drown it for what they had earned; and, He Forgives much.
42.35	And, those who dispute about Our Signs - may know they have no refuge.
42.36	So, whatever is with you is but this world's pleasures; to those who believe and put their trust in their God, - what is with Allah is Noble and Lasting.
42.37	They will forgive when they are angry, even as they guard against sin and shame.
42.38	And they will abide by their God's Command and endure - and, they will counsel their affairs among them, and provide from what We have Bestowed them.
42.39	And they will preserve when wronged.
42.40    	The recompense for the evil is the like of it; but, whoever forgives and makes peace, his goodly reward is with Allah - He indeed loves not the unjust.
42.41	So, whoever amends after an injustice upon him, there is no way against him.(601)
42.42	But whosoever is unjust and pert, against them is the way; for them is a painful chastisement.  
42.43	And whoso endures and forgives, it indeed is a disposition, formidable.
42.44    	And whoso Allah sends astray, after that he has no protector. And you will find on the Hour, the unjust on seeing the torment saying, "Is there a way out for us?"
42.45	And you shall see them disgraced when they are brought before it, glancing furtively. The believers will say, "Those who brought loss to them and their family are indeed in perdition on the Hour." Know that the unjust will be in the lasting torment.
42.46	But for Allah there will be no guiding helpers for them; and, whomever Allah has sent astray, no way has he.
42.47	Answer the call of your God before the Day arrives from Allah when one will not find any way of escape - on that Day there is no averting nor refuge for you, nor will ye have denial.
42.48	But if they turn away, We have not sent you as a guardian over them; to deliver is your duty. Man indeed is joyful if he is made to taste Our Favour; but if an evil befalls him for what his hands have earned, surely man is ungrateful.
42.49	Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; so, He Originates what He wills - He gives female children to whom He wishes and male children to whom He wishes.
42.50	Or He gives both male and female children; and, He makes whom He will infertile - surely, He is All-Knowing, All-Powerful.
42.51	It is not that Allah speaks to anyone but by Inspiration, or from behind a veil or through a Messenger who will deliver you His will by His Leave. He indeed is Most High, Wise.
42.52	Thus, We have Inspired you the enlightenment; you were not aware of the Book or about the Faith. But We cause Our Inspiration as the Insight and Guidance to whom We will of Our bondmen; and, indeed you guide to the Straight Path.
42.53	This is Allah's Way. And Allah's is what is in the Heavens and the earth. Lo! Unto Him is the return of all affairs.
	 
Chapter 43
The Embellishments
43.1	Ha Meem(602)
43.2	By the Book, Revealing!
43.3	Know that We have indeed given this Quran in Arabic.
43.4	And, it is in the Soul, with Us - the Most-High, Wise.
43.5	Would that We shall take away the Revelations from you because you had become sinful?
43.6	And how many a Messenger had We sent to nations before you!
43.7	But they did not but mock at every Prophet who came to them.
43.8	But We had destroyed those who were mightier than them; the examples of those of old have gone.
43.9	If you say to them, "Who Originated the Heavens and earth?" They will surely say, "He who is All-Powerful and All-Knowing, Originated them."
43.10    	It is He who made the earth vast and made broad ways in it that ye may find the path.
43.11		And Who sends down the rain from the sky in a measure thereby reviving the dead land; and, thus will ye be raised.
43.12	He created all the pairs; and, He created for you the ships and the cattle to ride upon.
43.13	That ye may perch upon their backs; and, when you are in the saddle, remember your God's Mercy more, and that you shall say, "Purity be to God, who made these subservient to us when we had no power over them."
43.14	And, "Surely we are to return to our God."
43.15	And they make some of His servants, His children; surely, man is ingrate.
43.16	Or had He chosen of His creations daughters for Him and sons for you?
43.17	When a glad tiding is given to one with that which he equated to the Bountiful, his face turns black; and, he is filled with anger.
43.18	What! that which is adorned with the jewels, and that which cannot make clear arguments in any affair? 
43.19	And they equate the servants of the angels of the Most Benevolent to females. Did they witness their creation? Their testimonies are kept in record for the questioning! 
43.20	And they say, "Had the Benevolent willed we would not have worshiped them." They have no knowledge whatsoever of that; they only lie.
43.21	Or have We given them the Wisdom before so that they have the hold?
43.22	Nay, they say, "Verily, we saw our fathers upon a path, and we indeed follow their rituals."
43.23	Thus, We did not send a Warner ere ye to any town, but the wealthy in it said, "Surely, we saw our fathers upon a way, and we follow their footsteps."
43.24	He said, "What, even if I bring you a better way than the way you found your fathers upon?" They said, "We surely are rejecters in that with what you are sent." 
43.25	Therefore We avenged them. Then behold, what was the end of those who belied!
43.26	And when Ibrahim said to his father and his folks, "I stay clear of what you worship!"
43.27	"Except Him who originated me; for He shall show me the Way."
43.28	And he made firm his say for their generations, that, they might return.
43.29    	But I let them and their fathers enjoy for a period until there came to them the Truth and a Messenger, clear.
43.30	But when the Truth came to them, they said, "It is a manifest sorcery! And we certainly shall reject it."
43.31	And they say, "Should this Quran not be sent down to any respectable person of the twin cities?
43.32	Do these distribute the Favour of your God? But We measure for their sustenance in this world; and, We have raised in degree some, over some others so that they are made to serve; the Mercy of your God is greater than what they amass. 
43.33	And were it not for that that the people would, as a whole, become of the disbelievers, We would have aggrandised with silver - the roof-tops and the stairways of the houses of disbelievers in the Benevolent. (603)
43.34	And doors to their houses and couches whereon to recline.
43.35	And ornaments of gold; but these are the mere enjoyments of the present life, and the life to come from the God is, for the God-fearing.
43.36	Whoso blinds himself to the remembrance of the Most Benevolent, to him We appoint Satan for comrade.
43.37	And they obstruct him from the righteousness, but they think they are guided aright.
43.38	Until he comes to Us, when he will say, "Alas! The distance of the two Easts should have been between you and me." An evil comrade! 
43.39	You avail not a benefit this day because you were unjust, and you will be companions in the torment.
43.40	So, can you make the deaf hear? Or can you guide the blind and he who is openly astray?
43.41	Whether We take you away, We shall requite them.
43.42	Or We shall show you Our Promise to them; surely We have power over them.
43.43	Hold fast to that which has been inspired to you; you indeed are on the right path.
43.44	Verily, it is a glad tiding to you and to your people; and, soon you will be brought to account.
43.45	And to those of the messengers We sent before you: Said, "Have We appointed deities to serve beside the Most Beneficent?"
43.46    	We indeed sent Musa with Our Signs to Firaun and his chieftains. He said, "Verily, I am a Messenger of the God of the worlds."
43.47	But when he brought them Our Signs, lo, they mocked at it.
43.48	But each Sign We showed them was greater than the next; then We seized them with the torment that haply they might return. 
43.49	And they said, "O Sorcerer! Entreat your God for us by the pact He has made with you. Surely we will be guided."
43.50	But when We removed their affliction, behold! they broke their word.
43.51	And Firaun said to his people, "Is not I possessing the authority over "Misr?" And beheld not ye, the rivers flowing beneath me?" 
43.52	"Or am I not greater than he, the disgraced and scarcely makes things clear?" 
43.53	"Why has he not been presented with golden bracelets or a band of angels not accompanied him?"
43.54	He treated his people lowly, and they submitted to him; and, thus they have indeed become a people surely transgressed. 
43.55	So, when they angered Us We took retribution from them, and We drowned them all.
43.56	And We made them a precedent and an example for those after them.
43.57	And when Isa, son of Maryam was exemplified, the people laughed out.
43.58    	And they say, "Who is better - our deities or is he? They take not him but for dispute; nay, they are people, contentious.
43.59	He is not but a servant on whom We blessed Our Favour and made him an exemplar for the people of Israel.
43.60	And had We willed, We would have made the angels to be the viceroys in the earth.
43.61	Verily, he is the Sign of the Hour! So, surely, have no doubt about that; and, follow me; this is the Straight Path.(604)
43.62    	And let shaitan not forbid you; surely, he is to you an enemy avowed.
43.63    	And when Isa came with clear Signs, he said, "Verily, I have brought to you the wisdom; and, I will clarify you certain of your affairs wherein are disputing. So fear Allah, and obey me."
43.64	Truly, Allah is my God and your God; so turn to Him, and this is the Straight Path.
43.65	But among them, the schismatics differed; so, for those who transgressed, suffer the curse of the day of torment.
43.66	Do they expect other than the Hour coming on them, of a sudden, while they perceive not?
43.67	Except the God-fearing, the friends on that day will be enemies one to another.
43.68	"My servants! Fear not ye, this day; nor will ye grieve."
43.69	Such are they who believed in Our Word, attaining Peace.
43.70	Enter the Paradise, well pleased - you and your companions!
43.71	Golden plates and bowls will come around them. And therein are what they wished for and comfort to their eyes. And, "You are immortal, in there."
43.72	And you inherited this Paradise, as recompense to that you were doing.
43.73	Therein for you are ample varieties of fruits wherefrom will ye eat.
43.74	Assuredly, the wrong-doers will be in the torment of Hell.
43.75	Nowise will it be lightened for them; and, therein are they in despair.
43.76   	 We have wronged them not, but they wronged.
43.77	And they will cry and say, "O the Guard! May your God finish us!" He will say, "Surely ye shall endure, forever."
43.78	Verily, We brought you the Truth, but most of you were averse to the Truth. 
43.79	Or do they decide on anything? Nay, We decide.
43.80    	Or do they think that We hear not their secret talks and what they plan in privacy? yes, but Our Messengers are with them, recording. 
43.81	Say, "I shall be the first one to worship if the Benevolent One had a son."
43.82	Glorified be the God of the heavens and earth, and of the Wisdom of the Universes, from what they ascribe.
43.83	So, until they meet their Promised Day, leave them drowned in their play.
43.84	And He is the God of the heavens and the God of the earth; and, He is the Wise, the Knower.
43.85    	Holy is He, with Whom is the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and what is in between them; and, with Him is the Wisdom of the Hour, and your return is unto Him.
43.86    	And whoever they call besides Allah, have no authority to intercede, except those who bear witness, standing by the justice.
43.87	And if you ask them who created them, they will surely say, "Allah!" So, how then are they deluded?
43.88	And his saying, "Our God! These are a people who believe not."
43.89	So, slight them aside and seek Peace. Soon they will know.




Chapter 44
The Smoke
    		
44.1	Ha Meem(605) 
44.2	By the Book, clear.
44.3	Verily, We sent it down on the Blessed Night, and We indeed are ever warning.
44.4	In it is determined, the wisdom of everything.
44.5	The Command is from Us; surely, We were ever sending.
44.6	A Mercy from your God; He indeed is the Hearing, the Knowing.
44.7	If you are steadfast, - the God of the Heavens and the earth and all in between them.
44.8    	There is no God but He; He gives life and causes death. The God of you, and of your fathers, the ancients.
44.9	And they are playful, doubting.
44.10	So expect the Day, when the sky brings a visible smoke.
44.11	It will surround the humans, it is a painful torment.
44.12	"Our God, remove this torment from us; surely we will be believers."
44.13	How will their mere thoughts avail them, while a clear Messenger has come to them?
44.14	They turned their backs on him saying, "Tutored, Mad!"
44.15	Surely, We will avert the torment for a while; "surely, you shall return!"
44.16	One day, Our hold will be firm; surely We will avenge.
44.17	And We certainly put to trial the people of Firaun before them; and, a Noble Messenger came unto them.
44.18	Saying, "Give up to me Allah's servants; surely I am to you a trusted Messenger."
44.19	"And rise you not above Allah; surely, I have come to you with Clear Authority."
44.20	"And verily, I seek refuge in my God and your God that you shall not stone me to death."
44.21	"And if you do not trust me, stay clear of me."
44.22	He turned to his God saying, "These are a sinful people."
44.23	"Set out by night with my servants; certainly, you will be followed."
44.24	"And leave the sea divided, for surely they are an army to be drowned."
44.25	How many were the gardens and water springs that they left behind!	
44.26	And the paddy fields and noble mansions!
44.27	And the pleasures wherein they took delight!
44.28	Thus it were; and, We made another generation to inherit them.
44.29	So, for them the sky and the earth wept not; nor were they respited.
44.30	And We saved the descendants of Israel from the humiliating torment.
44.31	And from Firaun; surely he was arrogant and one of the transgressing.
44.32	We indeed, knowingly chose them from the people of the world.
44.33	And We gave them the Signs wherein was a clear trial.
44.34	These men do say,
44.35	"We have nought but the first death, nor will we be raised again."
44.36	"If you speak truly, bring our fathers, yore."
44.37	Are they better? or the people of Tubba'u and those before them? They indeed were wrong-doers, and We destroyed them.
44.38	And We have not originated the Heavens and the earth and all in between in play.
44.39	We have not originated these but in truth; yet, most of them know it not.
44.40	Assuredly, the Day of Judgment is the appointed time for them all.
44.41	The Day when a friend avails not another in aught, and they will not be helped.
44.42	Except those upon whom Allah has Mercy. Surely, He is All-Mighty, Most Merciful.
44.43	Verily, Zaqqum, the tree-
44.44	Is the food for the sinners;
44.45	It will be as molten brass, seething in the stomach;
44.46	Like boiling water.
44.47	"Drag him away to the centre of the blazing Hell."
44.48	Then, "Pour the tormenting scalding water on his head."
44.49	"Taste it! You forsooth were the powerful, the glorified."
44.50	"Surely, this is which you were doubting about!"
44.51	"The God-fearing will be in safe place."
44.52	"Amidst Paradise' splendor and water springs"
44.53	"Seated, facing each other, in their grand garments of  'Sundhus and Isthabrak'.
44.54	Thus, We will join them with the companions having 'distinct vision'.
44.55	Secured therein, calling for fruits in kinds.
44.56	After the death before, therein, they will not taste the death; and He has secured them from the torment of Hell.
44.57	And your God's Grand Favour, and the Victory, Greatest!
44.58	That they might bring to mind, We made this easy, in your mother tongue.
44.59	Therefore expect ye; they are expecting too.

Chapter 45
Kneeling

45.1	Ha Meem(606)
45.2	This Book has been sent down by the All-Mighty, the Most Wise.
45.3	For the believers, surely are the Signs in the Heavens and earth.
45.4	And in that He has originated you and in the spreading out of the living beings are the Signs for the believing people.
45.5	And herein are the Signs: in the changing night and day; and, when Allah brings down Grace from the sky, thereby giving life to the dead land; and, in the ever altering nature of the breeze for those who mind.
45.6	These are the Signs of Allah that We inspire to you in Truth. Apart from Allah and His hadiths, i.e., the Truth, which other hadiths do they believe?
45.7	Woe to the lying sinners.
45.8	He lends ears to Allah's Signs elucidated to him; then he becomes headstrong and feigns as though he has not heard; so give him the good tidings of a chastising punishment.
45.9	If he knows any of Our Signs, he takes it in mockery; for him is a humiliating punishment.
45.10	Before them is Hell; and nought of what they had earned will avail them, nor, other than Allah, those they had taken as protectors - for them is a grave penalty. 
45.11	This is the Straight Path. Whoever has rejected the path of their God, for them is the harshest punishment.
45.12	It is Allah who subjected the sea to you, and that by His Command the ships may run, and thereof you shall seek His Favour; and, that you may show thanks."
45.13	And He, by His Mercy, has subjected to you what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, and surely in it are, many a Sign for those who ponder.
45.14	Say to the believers, "Forgive those who believe not in the appointed Hour; to humans, He would recompense in a just manner for what they had earned."
45.15	Whoever is righteous, is only for his good, and whoever wrongs, his wrong is for him; then, to your God you will be returned.
45.16	We certainly gave the Book, the Law and the Prophethood to the descendants of Israel; and, We gave them luxury, and We made them above the populations of the world.
45.17	And We gave them the clear Command, but they differed after the clear proofs came to them out of envy; your God indeed will decide between them on the Day of Reckoning concerning that wherein they were at variance.
45.18	And We have set you on the commendable way; so follow it; and proceed not behind the caprices of those who do not know.
45.19	Surely they cannot extend you a help against Allah; and, verily the wicked do help each other. But to the God-fearing, Allah is the Protector.
45.20	This is a clear Proof, and a righteous path and a Mercy for the faithful.
45.21	Or, do the evil ones think We will make them equal with those who believe in righteousness? And, in life and death are they the same? Evil is their judgment.
45.22	Allah has originated the heavens and earth in Truth; that each one shall be recompensed justly for what he had earned, and they will not be wronged.
45.23	Did yo see who had taken his caprice as Godliness? And while he knows - Allah lets him go astray, sealed his hearing and heart, and has drawn a veil over his eyes. So, after Allah, who is there to Guide him. Will ye not then heed?
45.24	And they say, "There is no life apart from this world; we die, and we live, and nothing but the ageing destroys us; but, of that, they have no knowledge; they merely guess."
45.25    	And when We show them Our Signs, all but what they argue with is this: "Bring us our forefathers, then, if you are truthful."
45.26	Say, "Allah gives you life, then gives you death, then He will gather you all on the Hour, wherein is no doubt - but most men do not know."
45.27	And the kingdom of the heavens and earth belong to Allah, and when the Hour arrives, liars will be the losers.
45.28	You will see each community kneeled. Each community will be called to its record. "This day, you will be recompensed for that you were doing."
45.29	"This is Our Record of you that shall speak the Truth. Verily, We were recording all that you used to do."
45.30	So, whoever were believing righteous, their God will make them enter His Grace. That is a clear Victory.
45.31	But to the disbelievers: "Were not My Signs shown to you clearly? Then you were unjust, waxing proud!"
45.32	And when said, "Indeed, Allah's Word is True, and doubt not about the Hour," you said, "We do not know what that Hour is, and we have only a surmise, and are by no means convinced."
45.33    	All their evils will become manifest to them, and that with which they mocked shall surround them.
45.34	And it will be said, "We forget you this day as you forgot the meeting of this Day. Hell is your dwelling place, and there is not a helper for you."
45.35	"It is because you had taken Allah's Signs for jest and that the life of this world has deceived you." And, on this day, they will not be delivered from it, nor will they be forgiven.
45.36	So, Glory be to Allah, the God of the Heavens, the God of the earth and the God of the worlds.
45.37	And to Him is the Reverence in the Heavens and the earth. And He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.





Chapter 46
The Sand Dunes

46.1	Ha Meem(607)
46.2	This Wisdom has been sent down from Allah, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.
46.3	We have not created the heavens and the earth and what is in between save but with Truth and for a term appointed; but, the unbelievers turned away from that whereof they were warned.    
46.4    	"Have you not considered that you call upon besides Allah? Show me what they have created of the earth? Or do they have any share in the heavens? Bring a Book before this, or any portion whose wisdom surpasses if you speak honestly."
46.5	And who is more astray than those who call upon besides Allah, that shall not answer them till the Last Day? And, they do not even hear their calling.
46.6	And when the humans are gathered, these will be their enemies, and they will deny their worshipping.
46.7	And whoever denied the Truth when it came unto them with Our revealing Signs to them, say, "It is a manifest sorcery!"
46.8	Or do they say, "He has forged it?" Say, "If I have forged it, you will have no power to help me against Allah. He is Best Aware of what you utter concerning it. Sufficient is He for a witness between me and you! And He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."
46.9	"I am not a new one of the Messengers, nor do I know as to what will happen to me or to you; and, I follow not except what is inspired in me; and, I am but a plain Warner."
46.10	"Did you consider, when this has come from Allah, and when a witness from among the people of Israel says, "Similar it is!" and believes, - while you deny arrogantly?" Allah indeed will not guide the wrong doers.
46.11	The unbelievers, concerning the believers, say, "Had there been aught good, they would not have advanced to it ahead of us." And while they are not in guidance by it, say, "This is an ancient lie!"
46.12	Before this, the Book, given to Musa had been a Guidance and Mercy. And this Book in Arabic testifies to it that it warns the wrongdoers and gives glad tidings to the good-doers.
46.13	Surely, those who say, "Our God is Allah!" and are firm, they will have no fear, neither will they grieve.
46.14	They are the inhabitants of Heaven wherein they abide as a recompense for their good deeds.
46.15	And We enjoined upon man that he may be kind to his parents; his mother carried him with difficulty and delivered him in strain; and, her carrying and weaning him is thirty months; when he attains age and reaches his forty years, he will say, "God! Grant me Mercy to show thanks to you for Your Grace upon me and my parents, and that I may do good which pleases Thee. And, make my descendants, the righteous people. Verily, I turn to you alone; and, surely I am of those who submit to Peace.
46.16	We accept the best deeds of such inhabitants of the heaven and pass over their evil deeds; and, the word given to them is the Word, True.
46.17	But he says to his parents, "Fie upon you! Do you frighten me that I will be raised again when generations have passed away before me?" Both his parents said to him, "Why this woe on you! Believe! Verily, Allah's Word is True," seeking Allah's help. To this, he said, "All these are the fables of the ancients! "
46.18	The situation of these are the same as the nation of jinns and men who passed away before them, against whom the word has come true. Verily, they were losers.
46.19	And all gain a status from what they do - that He may recompense them for what they have done, and they will not be wronged.
46.20	And on the Day when the disbelievers are exposed to the Fire, said, "While living on the earth, you dissipated all the good things for a game; so, this day you are awarded with the humiliating chastisement for your unjust pride and aggression on the earth."
46.21	And, brethren of Aad. Though there have been Warners before and after him, he warned his people from atop the sand dunes: "Verily, I fear for you the doom of a Mighty day."
46.22	They said, "Did you come here to turn us away from our deities? If you are truly speaking, bring us that wherewith you threaten us."
46.23	He said, "The Wisdom is surely with Allah, and I convey to you that wherewith I have been sent. But I see you as a people ignorant."
46.24	Then, when they saw the clouds coming towards their valleys, they said, "This is the pouring clouds for us." "Nay, this is what you hastened for - the tempest - in it is the painful torment."(608)
46.25	"By the command of its God, it destroyed all things; so when the day broke, nothing was seen but the houses. Thus do We recompense the people given to sin.
46.26	And We indeed, gave them the luxuries that We have not provided you, and We had given them hearing, vision and hearts. But their ears, eyes and hearts did not avail them in aught while they were rejecting the Signs of Allah. And what surrounded them was that wherewith they used to mock at.
46.27	And We have indeed destroyed the cities round about you; and, We continually showed Our Signs that they might return.
46.28	Then why have the deities they had taken besides Allah as a means of approach, did not help them? Nay, they vanished from them - they were their lies and what they forged.
46.29	And when We turned some of the Jinns to you to hear this Quran - and when they came there, they said, "Silence!" When it was over, they returned to their people, warning.
46.30	They said, "Our people! We indeed listened to a Reading. It has been sent after Musa, confirming what was before it, guiding to the Truth and to a right path."
46.31	"Our people! Answer and believe in him who calls you to Allah; He will forgive you your sins, and deliver you from a painful torment."
46.32	"But whoso does not answer Allah's summoner, cannot frustrate Him in the earth, and has no protector apart from Him; those are in manifest error. 
46.33	Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the earth and who was not fatigued by their creation, is able to bring life to the dead. Yes! He indeed has power over all things.
46.34	And when the rejecters are brought before the Fire, He will say: "Is it not True? They will say, "By our God, it is!" He will say, "Taste the torment rejection!"
46.35	"Observe patience as those steadfast of the Messengers! Do not hasten for them! When they see what they were Promised, on that day they will say, "They had not tarried for a second of a single day." It has to be clearly revealed! So, except the transgressors will any be destroyed?

Chapter 47
Muhammad

47.1 	Those who were rejecting and hinder Allah's Path, He has nullified their deeds.
47.2	But whoso believe and do good - and perceive that which has been revealed to the 'dignified', as the Truth from their God, He removes their evil from them, and sets their affairs aright. 
47.3	For, they indeed follow the lies while the believers follow the Truth from their God; thus Allah strikes their similitudes for the mankind.
47.4	If you are forced to confront the disbelievers, make them hang their heads down; if they brave, tighten their fetters - until you subdue them. Then release them after a compensation from them, or out of mercy; this, if Allah had willed, He would have avenged Himself upon them. Allah tests you, some with some others; And whoever is killed in the path of Allah, never will He waste their deeds.
47.5	He will guide them, and dispose their minds aright.
47.6    	And He will admit them into the Paradise He has made known to them.
47.7	O believers! If you help Allah, He will help you, and strengthen your stand.
47.8	Then, woe to those who reject; He will make vain all their deeds.
47.9	This is because they were averse to what Allah has sent down; so He made their deeds vain.
47.10	Beheld they not travelling on the earth, the end of those before them? Allah has decimated them; and, the like of it is for those who reject.
47.11	This is because Allah is the Protector for the believers, and that the rejectors have no protector.
47.12	Indeed Allah admits those who believe and do good things into the heavens beneath which the rivers flow; but the rejecters do enjoy and eat as the beasts; and, the Fire is their dwelling place.
47.13	And there were many a stronger nation than those who drove you out; We destroyed them and, there was not a helper for them. 
47.14	So, is he who is on the clear path from his God, like him to whom his evil work is made fair-seeming, and such as follow their lusts?
47.15	Is the similitude of the promised Heaven for those who fear God is: there in are the rivers of clear water unpolluted, rivers of milk unchanged in taste, rivers of the grapes' juice which gives pleasantness to those who drink and rivers of honey. And for them are fruits from all kinds and forgiveness of their God, like the one who stays in the Fire forever and to whom will be given scorching water to drink, which cuts up their intestines?
47.16	And there are among them who hear you, but when they disperse, they say to those who have the wisdom: "What did he say just now?" Upon their hearts has Allah set the seal. And they follow not but their desires.
47.17	And those who are righteous, Allah increases them in Guidance and instils piety.
47.18	Do they expect aught other than the Hour coming on to them suddenly? Surely its Signs have come; so, how will the admonition help them after it has reached them?
47.19	So, know that there is no God but Allah, and seek forgiveness for your sins and for the believing men and women; and, Allah knows your activities and your resting place.
47.20    	And the believers say: "Shouldn't it be that a chapter is sent down?" But if a chapter is sent down with a firm commandment that they shall endure for the cause, then, in whose heart is a disease, you will find them staring at you with a stare, as if one swoons of death. But it is better for them."
47.21    	Obedience and kind words. So, when a matter is determined, and if they were faithful to Allah, then, it is well for them.
47.22	If you turn back, will you create confusion on the land and sever your bonds of kin?
47.23	Such as these whom Allah has cursed, and made them deaf and blinded their sight.
47.24	What! Do they not reflect on this Quran? Or are there locks on the hearts?
47.25    	Surely, whoever turns away from the Straight Path knowingly, Shaitan made it fair-seeming to them and furthered them.
47.26	It is because they turn to those who reject that which Allah sends down and say: "We will follow you in certain aspects." But Allah knows their secrets.
47.27	So how shall it be when the angels capture their souls smiting their faces and their backs?
47.28	It is because they followed that which shall anger Allah and that they hated His satisfaction. So He made null their deeds.
47.29	Or do they think that Allah will not reveal to them the evil nature of those who have the disease in their hearts?
47.30	And had We willed, surely We would have shown them to you; you will know them from their marks, and certainly you will know them from their words. And Allah knows all that you do.
47.31	And We shall test you until such time that We knew who among you strive in patience. And We keep a watch over that you do.
47.32	And surely those rejecters who prevent from Allah's path and those who show obstinacy in disobedience to the Messenger after they knew well the Straightway, - they shall harm not in aught against Allah. And He will cause their works to fail.
47.33	O believers! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger, and waste not your deeds.
47.34	Allah indeed will not forgive them who while rejecting, prevents from Allah's way, and then, die as rejecters.
47.35	Do not compromise becoming weak while you are above them; Allah is with you - and He will not lessen your deeds.
47.36    	Verily, the life of this world is fun and game, but if you believe and fear your God, He will bless you with your right; and, He asks not you, your wealth.
47.37	Even if He asks and presses you for it, you will be stingy; and, He will make plain your heart.
47.38	Behold! You are a people called to spend in Allah's cause; but, there are niggardly among you - whoever is stingy, Allah is Needless, and you are the needy. So, if you turn away, Allah will replace you with a new generation who are not your likes. 


Chapter 48
The Victory

48.1	Surely We have given you a manifest Victory.
48.2	And that Allah shall forgive you, your wrongs of the past and the latter, and that He might Guide you by His Bountiful Mercy; 
48.3	And that Allah shall help you with a Mighty Help;
48.4	And that they shall strengthen their belief in the Faith, Allah sent down Peace in the hearts of the believers; and, Allah's are the hosts of the heavens and the earth; and, Allah is the Knowing, the Wise. 
48.5	That He may admit the believing men and women to the Paradises beneath which the rivers flow wherein to abide forever. He will remove all their evils, and ever is this, in the sight of Allah, the Mighty Victory.
48.6	Allah will punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women, and the idolatrous men and the idolatrous women; evil is hovering over them, and on them is Allah's wroth and the curse; and, He has prepared the Hell for them - the most evil a destination!
48.7	And Allah's are the hosts of the heavens and the earth. And Allah is Ever Mighty, Wise.
48.8	Surely We have sent you as a Witness, a Bearer of good tiding, and Warning.
48.9	That you may believe in Allah and His Messenger, succour Him, and Honour Him at dawn and in the evening. 
48.10    	Surely those who pledge before you, swear before Allah; Allah's watch is over that which they promise; so whoever breaks their oath, they indeed break to his self-destruction. And whoever performs his promise, for him is the swift and a generous reward from Allah.
48.11	And the ignorant who sit back will say, "Our properties and our households have pressured us to our duties; so, seek forgiveness for us." They say with their tongues that which is not in their hearts. Say, "If Allah wills upon you a harm or good, who shall have the authority in it against Him? Nay, Allah is All-Aware of what you do."
48.12	"Nay, surely you were of the belief that the Messenger and the believers shall not return to their families! And this was beautified for you; so you had an evil thought, and you have become a people wiped out.
48.13	And whoever believes not in Allah and His Messenger - then verily, We have prepared for the unbelievers a Blaze.
48.14	And Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth - He forgives whom He wills; He punishes whom He wills. Allah is Oft-Returning, All-Merciful.
48.15	When you set forth for the gains of the spoils, those who sat behind will say, "Permit us to follow you!" They wish to change Allah's Order. Say, "Follow not us! Thus has Allah said before." But they will say, "Nay, you are jealous of us." Nay! They are, but for a few, learn not.
48.16	They said to the ignorant, "You will soon be called against a formidable people; you shall stand up against them, or they shall obey you; then if you submit, Allah will reward you beautifully. But if you sit back as you had sit back before, He will punish you with a chastising punishment."
48.17	There is no blame upon the blind, nor upon the lame, nor upon the ill - and, whoso believes in Allah and His Messenger, He will admit them into Paradises beneath which the rivers flow. But whoever turns away, He will torment him with a severe torment.
48.18	When the believers swore submission to you, under the tree1, He Graced upon them tranquillity, knowing their hearts; and rewarded them a near Victory.(609)
48.19	And He made them gain innumerable booties. Allah is the All-Mighty, the Wise.
48.20	And, Allah Promise generous rewards to you that you shall receive. And He gave it to you swiftly and averted the evils of men from you; that it shall be a Sign unto the believers, and a Guidance.
48.21  	Awaiting is another; you deserve it not yet. But Allah is surely protecting it. Allah has Power over all things.
48.22	If the unbelievers had fought you, they would have turned back and flown. Then, they would not have found any protection nor any help for them.
48.23	Thus, has been the Way of Allah - it has happened before; so, thou shalt not see any change in Allah's Way.
48.24	And it is He who sheltered you in Mecca, after making you victors over them; He restrained their hands from you and restrained your hands from them. Allah is Ever Watchful over that you do.
48.25	It is the unbelievers who kept you from the peaceful living place and prevented the offerings from reaching where it is intended. And had there not been the believing men and the believing women, you would have harmed them unawares. Thus, you would have been harmed by them without your knowledge; that Allah might admit you into His Grace. If only the believers had stayed clear, We would have severely punished the unbelievers.
48.26	When the unbelievers set in their hearts zealousness, the zealotry of pagandom, Allah sent down Shechina upon His Messenger and the believers, and strengthened them upon His Words, and they were worthy of, and befitted it most. And Allah is the Knower of all things.
48.27	Surely, to the Messenger, Allah has made His dream, real. Had Allah willed, you will indeed enter the Blessed place fearlessly and beautifully, with your hairs done neatly. And you shall not fear; therefore, He Knows that you know not - and He had Bestowed upon you a heartening victory.
48.28	It is He who sent His Messenger with the Guidance and the True Path, that it may overwhelm every other way of life, and Allah suffices as Witness. 
48.29	Muhammad is the Messenger of the world. Those with him are stern with the unbelievers, and merciful towards themselves. You will find them considerate, humble, and seekers of Mercy and Satisfaction from Allah. And their mark is: Humility visible on their faces - this is the Sign of them in Thourat. And their mark in Injeel is: Like a grain. It sprouts and stands upon its stem, strengthening it. Then, it flourishes delighting the sowers, spreading out fortifying upon its stem by which Allah enrages the unbelievers - but whoever among them believe and do good deeds, for them, from Allah is the Word of Forgiveness and a Mighty Reward.





Chapter 49
The Chambers
    	
49.1	O believers! Advance not before Allah and His Messenger; fear Allah. Surely, Allah is the Hearing, the Knowing.
49.2	O believers! Raise not your voices above the voice of the Prophet, and be not loud in your speech to him, as you speak aloud to one another, lest your works will be lost while you are unaware.
49.3	Those who lower their voices before the Messenger of Allah, He indeed tests their hearts for God-fearing - for them is the Forgiveness and a Great Reward.
49.4	Those who call you from outside your rooms, the most of them do not understand.
49.5	And it would be better for them, had they waited until you come forth unto them. Allah is Oft- Forgiving, Most Merciful.
49.6	O believers! If a wrong-doer brings you a piece of news, be well-informed of it, lest you might wrong a community without knowledge, and then, you will be sorry for that you had committed.
49.7	Be informed - Verily, Allah's Messenger is with you. If he were to obey you in most of your affairs, it is you who will be distressed; but, Allah made belief dearer to you and beautified it in your hearts, and made hateful to you the rejection, wrong-doing and disobedience. Such are the Guided.
49.8	It is because of the Mercy and Blessing from Allah, and Allah is Knowing, Wise.
49.9    	And if two sections among the believers fight, make peace between them; but then, if one of the disputes transgresses against the other, encounter the transgressors until it returns to the fold of Allah. And if it returns, make peace between them justly; surely Allah loves the just.
49.10	Surely the believers are brethren; so make peace between your brothers, and fear Allah that He might show Mercy on you.
49.11	O believers! Let not one party speak ill of another party, for they may be better than them; likewise women shall not, of other women for they may be better than them. And despise not one another, and insult not with nicknames because, after the belief, deriding one by nicknames is very evil. And whoever does not repent are the unjust.
49.12	O believers! Turn away from assumptions; surely, some are evil, and keep off from penetrating into others' lives; neither involve ye in backbiting. Would any of you eat the flesh of his dead brother? You will abhor it; so, fear Allah. Surely Allah Accepts repentance. He is the Most Merciful.
49.13	O humankind! We indeed originated you from male and female; and, that you may know one another We caused you to fall into communities and sects. Surely the most noble in the sight of Allah is the most God-fearing of you. Allah indeed is Well-Aware, All-Knowing. 
49.14	The Arabs say: "We too believe in Allah!" Say: "You have not believed; but ye may say ye, a people satisfied in the ceremonies, for the faith has not entered your hearts. If you follow Allah and His Messenger, He will not reduce in aught of your good deeds. Allah indeed is Ever-Forgiving, Most Merciful."
49.15	Verily, the believers are those who believe in Allah and His Messenger, and who without a suspicion sacrifice in the path of Allah, their wealth and lives - such are truthful.
49.16	Say: "Do you teach righteousness to Allah? Allah knows well all in the heavens and the earth; and, Allah encompasses all things."
49.17    	They count it as an honour to thee that they had accepted Peace. Say, "Count not that you had benefitted me by supporting righteousness; if you are truthful, it is Allah who has favoured you, causing you to believe in the path."
49.18	Verily Allah is the Knower of the secrets of the Heavens and the Earth. And Allah sees all you do. 
	

Chapter 50
Quran

50.1	Qaf - By the Noble Quran!
50.2	But they wonder that there has come to them a Warner Messenger from amongst them; so the disbelievers say: "It is a wonder!"
50.3	After our death, and have become dust? That is a far returning!
50.4	We know for sure the extent to which the earth has shrunken, and with Us is the Book, secured.
50.5	But they denied when the Truth came to them; so they are in a case confused.
50.6	Have they not seen the sky above them - How We have made it and adorned it? And that therein is not a flaw?
50.7	And We have expanded the earth and have planted thereon the mountains firm, and produced the beautiful nature pairing with one another.
50.8	A vision and a reminder for every servant who turns.
50.9	And We send down the blessed water from the sky creating thereby gardens and field grain of harvest.
50.10	And tall palm-trees with clusters of dates.
50.11	A soothing for the servants - and therewith We raise the town after it is dead; even so is the coming forth.
50.12	Denied before them - the people of Nut, and the men of Russ and Samud.
50.13	And Aad, Firaun and the brothers of Lut. 
50.14	The dwellers of gardens, the people of 'Tubbau' - all tried to falsify the Prophets. So, my warning came true.
50.15	So, were We wearied by the first creation? Nay, but they doubt about the creation anew.
50.16	And We certainly created man, and We knew as to what his mind speaks to him; and, We are nearer to him than his life-vein.
50.17    	And when a witness each records sitting on the right and the left.(610)
50.18	Not a word he utters without the watcher by him, recording.
50.19	The torment of death brings the Truth: "Wherever you ran trying to avert, is this."
50.20    	And there will be the Call! That will be the Day of the warning!
50.21	Each soul will come with a bringer and a witness.
50.22	"You kept your eyes shut to this! We have removed your veil off you; so this day, clear is your vision!"
50.23	Then, the one with him would say: "Here! It is with me, ready!"
50.24	"Throw ye twain, every froward disbeliever into hell!"
50.25	"Disturber of the good, disquieter and doubter."
50.26	"He made another God with Allah; so, ye twain, cast him to a terrible doom."
50.27		His comrade would say: "Our God! I did not mislead him, but he was in far error."
50.28    		He will say, "Engage not in argument before Me; I have surely forewarned you!"
50.29	"The Word is not changed with Me; I wrong not My servants."
50.30    	On that Day We will ask Hell: "Are you full?" It will say, "Are there much more?"
50.31	And to the God-fearing, the heaven will be made nearer, not afar.
50.32	"This is the Word had been for you, and to each who guarded, fearing God."
50.33	 	Who fear the Benevolent in secrecy, and who turn to God with a returning heart.
50.34	"Enter it in Peace! This is the Day you will abide here, forever."
50.35	In it will be all they Wish, and much more is with Us.
50.36	And how many a stronger generation in valour than them had We destroyed before them; they ran into different towns; then, did they ever find a refuge?
50.37	Whoever has the heart and gives ears with intent, for him indeed is the Sign therein.
50.38	Verily, We Originated the heavens and the earth and what is in between in six periods; yet, no fatigue touched Us.
50.39	So observe Patience under what they say; and, Praise the Glory of your God before the dawn and before the dusk.
50.40	And Praise His Glory in the night, subdued.
50.41	And Listen on the Day, from him who shall call you from close. 
50.42	On that Day they shall hear the blast in truth; that is the Day of coming forth
50.43	Surely, We give life, and We cause death, and you are to return to Us.
50.44	The Day when the Earth will split asunder from about them, hastening forth; that is a gathering easy for Us.
50.45	We know what they say; you are not a compeller over them; so, admonish with this Quran those who fear the Warning.

Chapter 51
The Dusty Wind

51.1	By that which scatters to dust;
51.2	By that which carry the load;
51.3	By that which sail smooth;
51.4	By those who distribute by Command -
51.5	Verily, what you are promised is True;
51.6	And the recompense is sure to happen.
51.7 	By the sky full of beauty;
51.8	You art but in differing speech.
51.9	Whoever is turned away from it, is turned away.
51.10	The liars will perish.
51.11	They forget due to ignorance.
51.12	They say: "When is the Day of Recompense?"
51.13	That is the Day they will be tried over Fire.
51.14	"Taste your torment! This is that which you were seeking to hasten!"
51.15	Surely the God-fearing will be in the Gardens of Springs.
51.16    	They will accept what their God has Blessed them with; they indeed were good doers before.
51.17	They sleep not in the night but a little.
51.18	And they would be seeking Forgiveness in the latter part of the night.
51.19	And in their wealth is a guarantee for the have-nots and the needy.
51.20	And on the earth are the Signs for those firm in Faith.
51.21	And in yourselves; will you then not perceive?
51.22	And in the heavens are what you were promised, and your sustenance.
51.23	Then, by the God of the heavens and the earth! It is as good a Truth as the words you utter is yours.
51.24	Has the Hadith-News reached you, of the respectable guests of Ibrahim?
51.25	When they came to him, said: "Peace be upon you!" He said: "May there be Peace!" 'These people are strangers!'
51.26	Even so, he went to his folks and brought a fat piece of calf.
51.27	And laid it before them. Said, "Will you not eat?"
51.28	Thereat, he had a sense of apprehension about them. They said, "Have no fear!" And they gave the good news to him of a wise son.
51.29    	Then, hearing this, his wife came out before them crying smiting her face saying: "An old woman, and barren!"
51.30	"Thus does your God say; verily, He is All-Wise, All-Knowing."
51.31	He said, "O Messengers! What is your errand?"
51.32	They said, "We indeed have been sent to a sinful people.
51.33	"To send down upon them stones of clay.
51.34	"Marked by your God for the transgressors.
51.35	"So we had moved out the believers from their town.
51.36	"And we did not find but the folks of one house who are in Peace.
51.37	"We had left in this a reminder for those who fear a chastising punishment."
51.38	And in Musa - when We sent Musa to Firaun with Our clear Proof;
51.39	He turned his back with his court, saying, "He is a sorcerer or a man possessed!"
51.40	So We seized him and his hosts, and cast them into the sea. And he was the cursed.
51.41	And in 'Aad', when We sent against them the withering wind.
51.42	It did not leave without destroying to dust whatever it breezed past.
51.43	And to Samud, when it was said to them, 'Take your enjoyment awhile!'
51.44	Then they transgressed the Command of their God. So a deadly blast seized them while they stared.
51.45	They were neither able to stand nor were they could they receive help.
51.46	And, before them the people of Nuh: they were a people sinful.
51.47	And surely We created the heavens with powers, and surely We are the Expanders.
51.48	And We flourished the earth, so We are the excellent Preparers.
51.49	And We created everything in association that you may give thought.
51.50	So hasten towards Allah; surely I am to you a clear Warner from Him.
51.51	And set not gods with Allah; surely I am a plain Warner unto you from Him.
51.52	Even so not a Messenger came to those before them but said: 'a sorcerer; a madman!'
51.53	"Is it the manner they have exchanged?" Nay, they are people, insolent.
51.54	"So avoid them; you will not be disgraced."
51.55	"Remind them; the reminder profits the believers."
51.56	And I have not created the Jinn and the Humans except to serve Me.
51.57 	I need nothing of their provisions, not do I desire they feed Me.
51.58	Surely it is Allah who Provides, the Mighty, the Ever-sure.
51.59	The evil doers will surely have the share like that of what their companions had; so let them not hasten Me.
51.60	So woe to the rejecters on their day, promised.

Chapter 52
Tur

52.1	By the Thur!
52.2	By the Book inscribed.
52.3	By what has been explained.
52.4	By the house of ascent.
52.5	By the roof raised high.
52.6	By the sea filled with swell.
52.7	Surely the punishment of your God will come to pass.
52.8	There is none to avert it.
52.9	Upon the Day when the heaven shudders in tumult.
52.10	And the mountains will be blown away.
52.11	Woe that day unto the deniers.
52.12	Those who play at plunging.
52.13	On that Day they will be dragged with force to the hellfire.
52.14	"This is the fire which you used to deny."
52.15	"Is this magic, or is it that you do not see?"
52.16	"Burn therein; then bear with it or not - it is all one for you. You are only recompensed for that you were working."
52.17	Surely the God-fearing will be in the heavens and delight.
52.18	Rejoicing in that what their God has given them; and, their God had saved them from the torment of fire.
52.19	"Taste and drink to your hearts' content, for that you were working."
52.20	Reclining on the couches ranged in rows; and, We will join them with the people of vision.
52.21	And We will join them with those who believed and those descendants who followed them in belief; and, We will not deprive them of any of their works. Every man is a pledge for that which he has earned.
52.22	And We will provide them fruits and meat such as they desire.
52.23	They will serve cups to one another wherein is no prattle, no cause of sin.
52.24	There will be youths going around them, they will be like pearls, protected.
52.25	They will face one another, inquiring.
52.26	They will say, "When we were with our families, we were ever God-fearing."
52.27	"And Allah has been gracious to us, and saved us from the scorching wind."
52.28	"Indeed we used to pray unto Him before; and, surely He is the Beneficent,  the Merciful."
52.29	So, keep reminding them. By your God's grace, you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman.
52.30	Or, that they say, "A poet! By the time, we await his grief!
52.31	Say, "Await ye; indeed I too await with you!
52.32	"Or, are their minds drives them this way? Or are they an insolent people?
52.33	"Or do they say that you fabricated it? Nay, they shall not believe it!
52.34	"So, if they are true, let them bring a Hadith, Book like this!
52.35	"Or they were created without a thing! Or are they the creators?
52.36	"Or did they create the heavens and the earth? Nay, they are sure of nothing!
52.37	"Or do they possess your God's treasures? Or are these the controllers?
52.38	"Or do they possess the wisdom of authority by which they hear; if so let he who has heard bring a clear proof.
52.39	"Or has He daughters and you have sons?
52.40	"Or have you asked them wages and on that were they burdened?
52.41	"Or do they have the unseen and they write it down?
52.42	"Or do they want to plot? The rejecters are the surrounded?
52.43	"Or do they have God other than Allah? He is Most Pure from what they ascribe?"
52.44	If they see a fragment of sky falling, they would say, "A dense cloud!"
52.45	So leave them until they see their dreadful Day when they will lose all their senses.
52.46	On that Day none of their plots will avail them, and they will not be helped.
52.47	And for the wicked there indeed, is an added torment; yet most of them do not know.
52.48	And be patient for the decree of thy God - surely, you are in Our sight; so Glorify the Purity of your God when you rise. 
52.49	And Purify the Glory of thy God in a part of the night and when the stars fade.


Chapter 53
The Star

53.1	By the Star when it withers,
53.2	Your companion is not astray, nor is he in error;
53.3	Nor speaks out of desire.
53.4	It is naught but a revelation inspired.
53.5	The mightiest taught him.
53.6	Of such soundness, and he stood poised.
53.7	When he was in pure transcendence.
53.8	Then he drew closer, even closer.
53.9	Like the two points of a bow, or even nearer.
53.10	Then he revealed to His servants, all that he revealed.
53.11	His heart lied not of what he saw.
53.12	Will you then dispute with him as to what he saw?
53.13	And indeed he saw him again descending.
53.14	Near the tree of bounties.
53.15	Nigh which is the Paradise.
53.16	When the blessings covered the bounties.
53.17	The eyes swerved not nor get past it.
53.18	He indeed saw of the mightiest of his God's Signs.
53.19	Have you seen Laath and Uzza?
53.20	And the other, the third, the Manath?
53.21	What! For you the males, and for him the females?
53.22	If so, it is indeed an unjust division.
53.23	They are nothing but mere names that you and your fathers have spelt out; Allah has not sent down any proof to this; they indeed follow their surmises and desires. But there has come to them the straight path from their God.
53.24	Or shall man have all that he desires?
53.25	For, to Allah belongs this world and the Hereafter.
53.26	And how many an angel are in the heavens; yet, no one's intercession will avail aught except him about whom Allah is satisfied and pleased with, and allows.
53.27	Indeed the unbelievers in the Hereafter name the angels as if they are females.
53.28	They have no knowledge thereof; they follow only their surmises, and certainly, the surmises shall prevail not against the Truth.
53.29	So turn away from him who turns away from Our Remembrance, and who desires not except the life of this world.
53.30	Such is their sum of knowledge; verily, your God knows who has strayed from His Path, and Knows well the Guided ones.	
53.31	And to Allah belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth, that He may recompense those who do evil for what they have done, and reward those who do good for what they have done.
53.32	Whoever guards against the sinful acts and the evil mind, except that which they do without knowledge - indeed, your God is ample in Bestowing Mercy. He knows well when He Created you from the earth, and when you were foetuses in your mothers' wombs. So do not praise your purity; Allah knows who among you is Pious.
53.33	Have you seen him - turned away?
53.34	He gave a little, then he stopped.
53.35	Does he possess the knowledge of the Unseen, and so he sees?
53.36	Or has he not witnessed what is in the Scripture of Musa?
53.37	Of Ibrahim, the accomplished.
53.38	That no one laden bears the burden of another.
53.39	And to man, he only lives by what he is striving at.
53.40	And for sure, his striving will be shown to him.
53.41	And then, he will be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense.
53.42	And the final end is with your God.
53.43	And He makes you smile, and makes you weep.
53.44	And verily, He causes death and brings life.
53.45	And surely, He created the male-female pairs.
53.46	From a discharged drop of liquid.
53.47	And, surely it is with Him to bring you back to life.
53.48	Surely He makes you endowed, needless.
53.49	And verily, He is the God of the blind faiths. 
53.50	And that He destroyed the former Aad.
53.51	And Samud, he did not spare them.
53.52	And the people of Nuh before them; they indeed were ungodly and tyrannic.
53.53	And the overturned town, He overthrew.
53.54	Whatever has to surround them, surrounded.
53.55	So which of the Favours of your God do you dispute?
53.56	He is a warner of the warners of old.
53.57	The imminent is imminent.
53.58	None beside Allah can disclose it. 
53.59	Do you then marvel at this Hadith-disclosure?
53.60	Do you laugh, and not weep?
53.61	And you proudly sport.
53.62	So surrender to Allah, and submit to Him!

Chapter 54
The Moon
54.1	The Hour has drawn nigh, and the moon split.
54.2	Yet if they see a Sign they slight it and say, "A known sorcery!"
54.3	And they cry lies, follow their desires; yet every affair is a settled matter.
54.4	And there has come to them many a deterrent warning;
54.5	Soulful Wisdom; yet warnings do not avail.
54.6	So turn away from them. Upon the Day when the Caller shall call unto a horrible thing.
54.7	With abased eyes, they will come forth from the tombs like scattering gross-hoppers.
54.8	They will hasten to the caller, and the rejecters will say, "This is a hard-day."
54.9	Before, the people of Nuh denied them; so, denying Our servant they said, "Madman', and was driven away.
54.10	Then he submitted to his God, saying, "I am certainly a loser; so, help me!"
54.11	So We opened up the gates of the heavens with the downpour.
54.12	And We gushed forth the springs of the earth; thus, the waters met for a matter decreed.
54.13	And We bore him upon that which was well-planked and well-caulked.
54.14	Thus, to reward him who was rejected, it was sailing in Our Sight.
54.15	And surely We left it for a Sign. Is there any that will remember?
54.16	How then was My chastisement and warning?
54.17	Verily, We have made this Quran easy for pondering; so, is there anyone who shall ponder?
54.18	Aad denied. How then was my chastisement and warning?
54.19	Lo! We let loose on them a screaming tempest, on a day of constant calamity.
54.20	Tearing away men like the trunks of palm trees torn up.
54.21	How then was my chastisement and warning?
54.22	Verily, We have made this Quran easy for pondering; so, is there anyone who shall ponder?
54.23	Samud denied the warnings.
54.24	They said, "Will we follow from among us a lonely man? Then we will only be in error and insanity."
 54.25	Is it that upon him of all of us the message has been sent down? Nay, rather he is an insolent liar."
54.26	"They shall surely know tomorrow who the insolent liar is!"
54.27	"We will surely send a she- camel to test them; so watch them with patience!"
54.28	And tell them the water is divided between them and each shall drink water in his turn.
54.29	But they called their comrade; he took and hamstrung her.
54.30	How then was my chastisement and warning?
54.31	We sent upon them a single cry, and they were as the wattles of a pen-builder.
54.32	Verily, We have made this Quran easy for pondering; so, is there anyone who shall ponder?
54.33	The folks of Lut denied the warnings.
54.34	Lo! We sent upon them a storm of stones, save the family of Lut, whom We rescued in the last watch of the night.
54.35	As a blessing from Us; thus do We reward him who give thanks.
54.36	And he indeed had warned them of Our violent seizure, but they disputed the warnings. 
54.37	And they demanded his guests from him, but We blinded them: "Taste My chastisement after My warnings!"
54.38	So in the early watches of the night, the lasting torment descended upon them.
54.39	How then was my chastisement and warning?
54.40	Verily, We have made this Quran easy for pondering; so, is there anyone who shall ponder?
54.41	And the folks of Firaun did receive the warnings!
54.42	They denied Our Signs, all of them; then We seized them with a seizure of the Mighty and All-Powerful.
54.43	Are the rejecters with you mightier than them? Or have ye immunity in the Scriptures?
54.44	Or do they say, "We are a host victorious?"
54.45	The hosts will all be routed and will turn and flee.
54.46	Nay, but their promised Hour is the Hereafter, and the Hereafter will be disastrous and bitter.
54.47	Surely the sinners are in error and insanity.
54.48	On the Day when they are dragged on their faces to the Hell, "Taste the smiting of the Hell-fire!"
54.49	We indeed have created everything in measure.
54.50	Our Command is not but as the blink of an eye.
54.51	We have destroyed the likes of you; is there then any that will remember?
54.52	And in the records are every deed of theirs.
54.53	Small or big, all are recorded.
54.54	Surely the God-fearing will be amid the gardens and rivers.
54.55	Upon the True Throne, near the Mighty King.




Chapter 55
The Bountiful

55.1	The Most Bountiful.
55.2	Taught the Quran.
55.3	He originated Man.
55.4	He explained to him in detail.
55.5	The sun and the moon to a reckoning.
55.6	And to Him do the plants and the trees surrender.
55.7	And he held the sky high, and He established justice.
55.8	That you shall not transgress.
55.9	So establish justice and be not unjust.
55.10	And the earth - He expanded it for His creations.
55.11	Therein are the various kinds of fruits and sheathed dates.
55.12	And the husk-covered grains and the flavorous much more.
55.13	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.14	He originated human beings of clay like the potter's.
55.15	And created the jinns from the fire-flame.
55.16	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.17	He is the God of the two ways of the earth, and the two ways of the heavens. 
55.18	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.19	He let forth the two seas; they meet.
55.20	There is a barrier between them; they shall not overpass. 
55.21	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.22	From both of them come forth corals and pearls.
55.23	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.24	And His are the ships sailing in the sea loftily like mountains.
55.25	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.26	All that dwells upon the earth shall perish.
55.27	And what remains forever is that which pleases your God, the full of Majesty and Honour.
55.28	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.29	Those in the heavens and on the earth implore Him. His affair rise high every day.
55.30	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.31	O ye twain! Soon Our respite for you will end.
55.32	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.33	O company of Jinns and humans! If you have the power to cross the barriers of heavens and the earth, then overpass! Yet, you pass not without the Authority.
55.34	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.35	Against ye twain shall be loosed a flame of fire and smoke, and you will have no defence.
55.36	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.37	So, the skies will cleave asunder and it turns like the rose-oil.
55.38	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.39	On that day, it will not be asked of the humans or the jinns concerning their sins.
55.40	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.41	The sinners will be known by their marks and they will be taken by their forelocks and their feet.
55.42	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.43	"This is the hell which the sinners called a lie!"
55.44	They will be going around between it and fierce, scalding water.
55.45	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.46	And for him who fears facing his God are twin paradises.
55.47	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.48	Abounding in branches;
55.49	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.50	In them there will be two flowing springs.
55.51	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.52	Therein of every fruit two kinds-
55.53	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.54	They will be reclining on couches lined with the silk brocade, the fruits of the two gardens hanging low.
55.55	 So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.56	In them will be insightful companions, modest - whom neither any man nor jinn corrupted before them.
55.57	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.58	They will be like white pearls and corals.
55.59	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.60	Is there any other than good wages for good?
55.61	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.62	And besides them, there shall be two gardens -
55.63	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.64	Dense green.
55.65	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.66	Therein two springs, gushing forth-
55.67	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.68	Therein fruits, and palm-trees, and pomegranates-
55.69	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.70	Therein are the good and elegant-
55.71	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.72	Insightful ones, guarded in cool pavilions-
55.73	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.74	Uncorrupted by Jinn or humans before-
55.75	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.76	Reclining on green cushions and fine carpets.
55.77	So, which of the favours of your God will you both deny?
55.78	Blessed are the Attributes of your God, owner of Majesty and Honour.


Chapter 56
The Event        

56.1	When the Event befalls;
56.2	There is no denying that it will befall.
56.3	It will abase, exalt.
56.4	When the earth will be made to shake with convulsions.
56.5	And when the mountains are made to crumble.
56.6	Then it will be dust spread out.
56.7	And you will become of three sections.
56.8	Then the companions of the right - who are those of the right?
56.9	And the companions of the left - who are those of the left?
56.10	And the foremost are the foremost.
56.11	They are those made the nearest.
56.12	In the Paradises of Bliss.
56.13	A multitude of the Foremost,
56.14	And a few of the later people.
56.15	On the lined couches.
56.16	Reclining on them facing each other.
56.17 	Moving about them are young boys, eternal.
56.18	With the clear drink, filled up in goblets, ewers and a cup.
56.19	Their sensitivity is not lost nor will they lose sensibility.
56.20	And the fruit of their choice.
56.21	And the flesh of birds they may like.(611)
56.22	And the insightful, the Hurul Eins.(612)
56.23	Like unto hidden pearls.(613)
56.24	A reward for what they used to do.
56.25	Therein they shall not hear idle talk, nor cause of sin.(614)
56.26	Only the saying: "Peace! Peace!"
56.27	And the companions of the 'Right!' Who are the companions of the right?
56.28	Amidst the blessings,
56.29	Amid the gardens of fruits,
56.30	And in extended shades,
56.31	And the gushing springs,
56.32	And fruits in varieties,
56.33	They are endless, not forbidden,
56.34	And splendiferous couches.(615)
56.35	We shall create such womankind as an anew;
56.36	Pure from all unholy desires;
56.37	Kind, equitable;
56.38	Such, the womankind of the right-hand.
56.39	A multitude of those, foremost;
56.40	And all those of the right-hand!
56.41	And the people of the left-hand! Who are of the left-hand?
56.42	Mid the scorching air and the scalding water,
56.43	And in the thick of the burning smoke;
56.44	Neither coolness nor calmness;
56.45	They were indeed in luxurious pleasure before this!
56.46	And they persisted in grave sin;
56.47	And they were saying, "Is it sure, that we will be raised up again after our death and that we have become dust and bones?"
56.48	And our fathers, ancient?
56.49	Say, "The ancients, and the latter."
56.50	"On the appointed Hour, will ye all be gathered!"
56.51	"Then indeed - ye, the lying, the astray!
56.52	You will eat of the 'Zaqqum' tree.
56.53	And you will fill your bellies with it.
56.54	And worse, you will drink scalding water.
56.55	Lapping it down as thirsty camel.
56.56	This is their feast on the Day of Judgment. 
56.57	We originated you; will you not then believe the truth?
56.58	Have you considered that which you emit?
56.59	Do you create it or are We the creator? 
56.60	And We have caused the death among you; so, none can outstrip Us.
56.61	We will replace you with your like, creating you in a way you do not know. 
56.62	You certainly know the creation of your first generation - then, will you not give a thought?
56.63	Have you considered that which you sow?
56.64	Do you make it grow or are We causing it to grow?
56.65	If We will, will make it refuse, and then you will be looking on, wondering.
56.66	"Lo! we are laden with debt."
56.67	"And we are forbidden."
56.68	Have you considered the water you drink?
56.69	Do you bring it down from the cloud or are We bringing it down?
56.70	Had We willed, We would make it bitter! So, why are you not thankful?
56.71	Do you consider the fire you kindle?
56.72	Is it you that made its wood or are We the makers?
56.73	We created it to reflect upon so that it benefits him who uses it.
56.74	So, praise the Glory of your God by His Attributes, Exalted.
56.75	But nay, I swear by the setting of stars!
56.76	If you know, this is a Mighty Truth.
56.77	Verily, this is a Noble Quran!
56.78	In this Book, it is well established.(616)
56.79	Except the Pure hearted, none shall reach upto it.
56.80	It is sent down by the God of the worlds.
56.81	Yet, are you mindless concerning this Hadith - Revelation?
56.82	Do you take your lies for your provisions?
56.83	At the Hour of death when it chokes the throat,
56.84	You are plain watchers at that time.
56.85	But We are closer to him than you; yet, ye see not.
56.86	So, if it is that you shall not be recompensed-
56.87	And if you speak the truth, why do you not revive him?
56.88	But if he is in the Nearness-
56.89	There shall be repose, ease and a blessed Paradise!
56.90	And if he is the companion of the right-hand,
56.91	O people of the right-hand! May you have Peace!
56.92	But if he was of those who lied and went astray-
56.93 	He will be greeted with scalding water;
56.94 	To be flung into the hell;
56.95	Surely this is the Eternal Truth.
56.96	So, praise the Glory of your God by His Attributes, Exalted.



Chapter 57
The Iron
	
57.1	Everything in the Heavens and the Earth Glorify Allah. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
57.2	His is the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth; He quickens and gives death;  and,He is Able over all things. 
57.3	He is the Preceder,  the Follower, and He is the Manifest and the Secret; and, He is the Knower of all things.
57.4    	It is He Who intended that the Heavens and the earth be originated in six periods; then He set Himself upon the Kingdom. He Knows well that which enters the land, and sprouts out; and, that which is sent down from the sky and that which raises up to it. And He is with you wherever you are; and, Allah is Ever a Watcher over what you do.
57.5	The Kingdom of the sky and the earth is His, and all affairs shall return unto Him.
57.6	It is He Who causes the night to enter into the day, and the day to enter into the night; He is the Knower of all that are in the hearts.
57.7    	Believe in Allah and His Messenger; and, in whatever He has made you inheritors, spend of it; for, those who believe and expend, for them is a high reward.
57.8	What is that with you that ye believe not in Allah when your Messenger calls you unto believing in your God Who has taken your solemn Covenant, if ye are believers?
57.9	It is He Who sends down upon His servant clear Wisdom to bring you to light from the darkness; and, Allah indeed is Most Merciful, Most Kind to you.
57.10    	And what prevents you that you do not spend in the path of Allah? Allah's is the Authority in the heavens and the earth. No one among you is equal to those who were steadfast and spent before the victory; and, they are exalted in rank above those who spent after the victory; yet. Allah has Promised all a fair reward, and Allah is the Knower of all that ye do.
57.11	Who will give a beautiful loan for Allah's sake? He doubles it for him; and, for him is a Noble Reward!
57.12	On the Hour when you see the believing men and the believing women, you will see their light speeding in their front and to their right. "Today your reward is the Paradises beneath which rivers flow; therein you abide." That is the Mighty Triumph.
57.13	Upon the Day when the hypocrite men and hypocrite women shall say to the believers, "Look on us, so that we shall avail some light!" It shall be said, "Go back behind you and seek for a light!" Then there will be raised a wall between them having a gate, the inner side whereof is Mercy while the outer side thereof is punishment.
57.14	They will cry aloud to them, "Were we not with you?" They will say, "True. But you yourself to trial; you were expecting, suspecting; and until Allah's command came to pass, vain desires beguiled you; and, the deceiver has deceived you about Allah."
57.15	Therefore, today no ransom is accepted from you or from the rejecters; your abode is the Fire; it is most worthy for you. What an evil refuge!
57.16	Has the time not reached those who believed that their hearts trembled in fear at the thought of Allah and the Truth that has come down? And let them not become as those to whom the Book was given; their hearts have hardened after a long period has passed over them. And many of them are defiantly evil.
57.17	Know that Allah quickens the earth after its death; We reveal to you the Signs so that you will remember. 
57.18	Surely, the alms giving men and women, and those who give a fair loan for Allah's sake - it shall be multiplied for them; and, they will have a generous reward.
57.19	And those who believe in Allah and His Messengers - they are the truthful and the witnesses in the eyes of Allah; they shall have their Reward and their Light. And those who reject and belie Our Signs, - they are the companions of Hell-Fire.
57.20    	Know that the life of this world is but delusion, diversion and adornment; and, self-boasting and increasing the wealth and the children among you- the similitude for this is that of rain: the produces it brings forth rejoices the rejecters, but soon you see it drying up and turn yellow. Then it becomes decomposed; in the Hereafter, even severer will be the punishment. And there is Allah's Forgiveness and contentment. So the life of this world is not but delusion and mean enjoyment. 
57.21	Race toward your God's Forgiveness and Paradise- its expanse is as the expanse of the sky and the earth; and, it is prepared for those who believe in Allah and His Messenger; that is the Mercy of Allah, and He Grants it to whom He Will. And Allah is Ever Ample-Giving.
57.22	It is not that whatever that happens in the earth or in you is Prescribed in a Record, before its occurring. Surely, that is easy to Allah.
57.23	And that you may not grieve over what is lost to you, and that you shall rejoice in what He has granted to you. Allah does not love those who are arrogant and boastful.
57.24	Such as are stingy, and bid men to be stingy; and, whoever turns away - verily, Allah is All-Sufficient, the Praiseworthy.
57.25	We indeed have sent Messengers with Clear Signs; and that, for the men to preserve justness, We sent down with them the Wisdom and the Revelation. And We created the Iron wherein is utmost destruction, but there are some advantages for the man; so that Allah may make evident those who help Him and His Messenger in secret.
57.26    	And indeed We sent Nuh and Ibrahim, and among their descendants, We gave Prophethood and the Book; there are those who were guided. But many of them were defiantly evil.
57.27	Then, We made Our Messengers follow them; We made Isa, son of Maryam to follow and gave Injeel. We caused Kindness and Mercy in the hearts of those who followed him. But We have not ordained upon them to be hermits which they have invented- but for that, they may gain the pleasure of Allah. But they have not preserved it in the way they should have preserved. Then, We rewarded those of them who believed; yet, many of them are defiantly evil.
57.28	O believers! Fear Allah and believe in His Messenger; He will grant you twice His Blessings and give you a Light by which you will follow the righteousness; and, He will Forgive for you. Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
57.29	That the people of the Book shall not doubt that they are not worthy to receive anything as Grace from Allah; and, know for sure that all Mercy is with Allah. He grants it to whom He is pleased with. Allah is Ever Most Gracious.

Chapter 58
One That Disputes

58.1    	She who has disputed with you about her husband and has also pleaded with Allah, Allah has indeed listened to her cry; and, Allah has heard to both the disputes. Verily, Allah is the Hearer, the Seer.
58.2	Some among you say their wives as their 'mothers!' It is not that they are their mothers due to that. Whoever begot them are their mothers, but they surely say of what is loathsome and falsehood. But Allah is Most Relenting, Most Forgiving.
58.3	And whoever having said about their wives 'as their mothers', then comes to senses, before they resume their family relations, they shall free a slave - Allah admonishes you with this. And Allah is All-Aware of that you do.
58.4	If anyone has no means towards it, then before they touch each other they shall observe fasting for two consecutive months. If they cannot observe, then they shall feed sixty poor souls - that you may believe in Allah and His Messenger, and this is the limitation set by Allah. And whoever denies, for him is a painful torment.
58.5	Whoever opposes Allah and His Messenger, surely they will be disgraced as those before them were disgraced; We indeed have sent down Clear Warnings. And for the rejecters, is an abasing punishment.
58.6	On the day, when Allah gives them life and raises them all up, and then informs them of all that they did - though they would forget, Allah has recorded it. Then, Allah is Witness over all things.
58.7	Have you not observed Allah indeed Knows all in the heavens and the earth? In their secret council of three, it is not but Allah is the fourth among them; nor of the five, but He is the sixth. Nor lesser or greater than that wherever they are, but Allah is with them. Then on the Lasting Day, Allah will inform them of what they used to do. Surely, Allah is Cognisant of all things. 
58.8	Have you not seen them, kept involving in the secret talks with sin and transgression against the Messenger despite the warnings that they shall not engage in the secrets? Then when they come forth to you, they say to you 'Peace', with which Allah is not pleased. And when they gather again secretly, they say to themselves, "Why has Allah not punished us for what we said?" Hell suffices them. They shall enter into it. What an evil destination!
58.9	O those who believe! If ever you engage in secret counselling, intend not sin and transgression, and disobedience to the Messenger while you are at it. But speak secretly to stay pious and to do good. And for Allah - unto Whom you shall be gathered - Fear Him!
58.10	The secrecy is from Shaitan to cast worry upon the believers; but without Allah's leave, he cannot cause any harm. So, may the believers, put their trust in Allah.
58.11	O believers! In a gathering, if you are said: "Move," move away; Allah will give you the place; and, when you are said: "Stand", then walk out; and, Allah will raise you in degrees who are believers and to whom the Wisdom of the Unseen is given. Allah is Aware of what you do.
58.12   	O believers! If you are to talk to the Messenger in secret, do some charity before doing so; that is good and pure for you; but if you have no means to it - Allah is indeed Most Forgiving, Most Merciful.
58.13	Do you fear that you should have done good things before the secret counselling? Allah Forgives you even if you had not done it; so, keep up the sense of fear to your God, and for your purity give alms; and, follow Allah and His Messenger. And Allah Knows all ye do.
58.14	Have you seen him who keeps close relations, against whom Allah wrath is upon? They are neither of you, nor of them; and, wittingly they swear upon falsehood.
58.15	Allah has prepared for them a harsh punishment; indeed evil is that they are wont to do.
58.16	They bar the path of Allah using their oaths as a shield; so, for them is a disgraceful doom.
58.17	Their wealth and their people shall avail them aught against Allah; they are the companions of the Fire, wherein they abide forever.
58.18	On the Day when Allah raises them all up, they will swear to Him as they swear to you, and indeed would think they are on something. Surely they are the liars.
58.19	Shaitan has overcome them and made them forget, remembering Allah! They are the party of shaitan. The devil's party - surely, they are the losers.
58.20	Surely those who oppose Allah and His Messenger, they are among the people, abject.
58.21	Allah has decreed: "I and My Messengers will surely Overpower!" Allah indeed is All-Strong, Almighty.
58.22	You shall not find those who believe in Allah and the Lasting Day love them who have opposed Allah and His Messenger - they may be their parents, children or brothers; or, their relatives. In their hearts, Allah has strengthened their Faith; and, He has further strengthened them with His Ruh - the Soul. He will make them dwell eternally in the Paradises, beneath which the rivers flow. Allah is Pleased with them, and they are Pleased with Allah. And know for sure, it is Allah's Party, they are the Victorious!

Chapter 59
The Gathering

59.1	Whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth Praise the Purity of Allah. He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.
59.2    	It is Him, the first, to evict from their houses - those deniers of the people of the Book in the first mustering. But you never thought that they would leave; and, they too thought that their fortresses would surely protect them against Allah; but Allah cast terror into their hearts from a direction, unexpected. And they destroyed their houses with their own hands and the hands of the believers. So the people of Insight, remind ye!
59.3	And had Allah not decreed upon them their eviction, he would have severely punished them, in this world itself. And in the Hereafter for them is the torment of the Fire.
59.4	And they did breach with Allah and His Messenger; and, whoever breaches with Allah, - Allah indeed, is Severe in Retribution.
59.5	And that you destroyed the palm-trees, or that you left it standing on its roots is only by Allah's Leave, and that He abases the evil-doers.
59.6	And whatever that Allah gave from them unto His Messenger, - for this, you had neither spurred the horses, nor pricked the camels; yet, Allah surely gives authority to His Messengers, over whom He wills. And Allah has Power over all things.
59.7    	What Allah extracted from the people of the town to His Messenger, belongs to Allah and His Messenger, for the near ones, for the orphans, for the needy, and for the righteous; and, that it shall not circulate within the wealthy ones among you! And accept that which the Messenger bids for you, and stay away from what he forbids; and, fear Allah. And Allah is Severe in Retribution.
59.8	It is for the emigrants who were driven out of their homes and possessions, seeking Allah's Mercy and His good Pleasure - they are helping Allah and His Messenger. They are the truthful ones.
59.9	And some others - those who have already set their houses up in Faith; they love the immigrants, expelled from their homes; and, in their hearts, they will not be in need from that has been bestowed on them; despite their poverty they will prefer them above themselves. Such as they, saved from the stinginess, are the successful.
59.10	And to those who come after them: they will say, "Our God! Grant us and our brothers who preceded us in Faith, Pardon! And allow not enmity in our hearts, towards the believers! Our God, You are the Most Kind, Most Merciful."
59.11    	Have you not seen the hypocrites? They said to their unbelieving brethren among the people of the Book, "If you are driven out, we too will surely go out with you; and, we will never surrender to anyone; and, if they fight against you, we will truly be your helpers. But Allah bears witness, 'they surely are liars!'
59.12	If they are driven out these will not go out with them; and, if they are fought against, they will not help - and, even if they help, they will turn their backs on you and flee. Then, they will not be helped.
59.13	Truly in their hearts the fear of you is more, than for Allah; and, this is that they are people, senseless.
59.14	They will not come together to fight with you except behind the heavily fortified fortresses or a great wall; and, amongst them rivalry and enmity are terrible. You think their unity is formidable; but their hearts are scattered; and, this is that they are people without knowledge.
59.15	As some, before them, nearer - they suffered for their vileness. And for them is a painful punishment.
59.16	Like the example of Shaitan: he says to man, "Disbelieve".  And when man disbelieves, he leaves him and says, "I am free of you; lo! I fear Allah, the God of the worlds!" 
59.17	So, the end for both is the eternal dwelling in the Fire; that is the recompense of the evildoers. 
59.18	O, ye who believe! Fear Allah; let everyone remember what ye have sent forth for your reckoning; and conduct ye, fearing Allah. Allah surely knows what ye do.
59.19	And do not be like those who have forgotten Allah, because He has made them forget themselves. These are the worst sinners.(617)
59.20	Not equal are the inmates of the Fire and the owners of the Paradise. It is the owners of the Paradise who have achieved the Felicity. 
59.21	Had We sent down this Quran on a mountain you would have seen it tremble and rent apart for fear of Allah. We reveal examples to the man that haply he may give a thought.
59.22	He is Allah! No God other than He. He is the Knower of the Unseen and the manifest. He is the Most Generous, the Most Merciful.
59.23	He is Allah, than Him there is no other Allah. The Sovereign King. The Most Pure. The Giver of Peace. The Grantor of Faith. The Protector. The Exalted. The Controller. The Magnanimous - Allah is Most Glorious, above all that they ascribe to Him as partners.
59.24	He is Allah - The Originator. The Perfecter. The Creator. Unto Him is All the Glorious Attributes. All that are in the Heavens and the Earth Glorify Him. He is the All-Mighty, the Most Wise.

Chapter 60
The Examining

60.1    	O ye who believe! Take not those who are My enemies and your enemies as your earnest friends that you may reveal the hidden Truth to them. They hate the Truth that has come to you, and they drive out this Messenger and you because you believed in your God, Allah - if only you had set out to fight in My Cause and to My Good Pleasure! Because of your friendliness you disclose the secrets, but I am Aware what you conceal and what you make plain. So, whosoever of you does that among you, he verily has strayed away from the right way.
60.2	If they have a chance against you, they will be your enemies and harm you stretching out their hands and tongues. And they long for you to disbelieve.
60.3	On the Day of Judgment, your near and dear ones shall avail you nought; justice will be done between you; and, Allah is ever a Watcher over what you do.
60.4	There is indeed a perfect example for you with Ibrahim and those with him: they said to their people, "We have certainly cleared of that which you call upon besides Allah; and, we have rejected you. And until you become faithful to Allah, the only God, there has arisen hostility and hatred forever between us and you." And Ibrahim, but said to his father, "I have no power to prevent aught from Allah against you; but surely I will pray Allah for you, Forgiveness." And, he said, "Our God! We put our trust in Thee, and unto Thee is our return."
60.5	"Our God! Make us not a trial to the rejecters. And our God! Forgive us. Verily, Thou art the Mighty, the Wise."
60.6	There is a perfect example in them for those who believe in Allah and the Last Day. But whosoever turns away - for sure, Allah is Needless, Glorious!
60.7	Allah may cause affection with those of them against whom you have enmity; Exalted is Allah. Allah is Most Forgiving, Most Merciful.
60.8	Allah forbids not you to do good and deal justly with those who did not obstruct you in your way, and who drove you not from your houses. Surely Allah loves those who are just.
60.9	Verily, what Allah forbids is the affection you might develop for those who fought against you in your way, and drove you out of your homes and helped to drive you out. So whosoever make friends of them, they are the unjust.
60.10	O believers! If the immigrant believing women come to you, you shall check them; Allah Knows their Faith; so, if you come to know they are believers, send them not back to the disbelievers for such women are not lawful to those men, and those men are not lawful to such women. And no blame is on you that you give the women their dowry and make them of your household. And you shall not forcibly retain the wedlock of the disbelieving women; and, you can ask them that you had spent on them - this is the ordainment of Allah and the decision between you. And Allah is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.
60.11 	And those of your wives who have fled you and joined with the disbelievers - then, when you get the spoils of war, give them whose wives have fled, equivalent to that what they had spent on them. And fear Allah upon whom you had placed your Trust.
60.12	O Prophet! Accept the oath of the women when they come to you and pledge before you - that they shall not ascribe a partner to Allah, that they shall not steal, that they shall not indulge in prostitution, that they shall not kill their children, and that they shall not bring to public what they fantasies between their hands and legs - and when they swear that they will not act against the good of you. And seek forgiveness for them. Surely, Allah is Ever-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
60.13	O believers! Love not the people against whom is the wrath of Allah. It is because they indeed have lost all hopes of the Hereafter as the unbelievers have lost hopes of those who are lying dead in their tombs.

Chapter 61
The Row

61.1	All that is in the Heavens and the Earth glorifies Allah. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
61.2	O believers! Why do ye say that ye do not do?
61.3	To say what you do not do is most hateful in the eyes of Allah.
61.4	Allah loves those who fight in His Way in ranks as though they were a building well-compacted.
61.5	And remember when Musa said to his people, "O my people! Why do ye harm me while ye know well I am a Messenger for ye from Allah?" So when they slipped, Allah made their hearts slip; and, Allah does not guide the transgressors.
61.6	And remember when Isa, son of Maryam said, "O People of Israel! By that that I have come to rectify the Taurat before me, - and that I shall give glad tiding about a Messenger after me by name 'Ahmad - The Honorable', I have come to you as a Messenger of Allah. But when he brought to them 'Clear Signs', they said, "It is manifest magic!"
61.7	Who is more unjust than he who forges against Allah when he is called to the 'Path of Peace!' And Allah will not guide a wrong doing folk.
61.8	They desire to blow out the Light of Allah with their mouths; but Allah will perfect His Light, though the unbelievers are averse. 
61.9	It is He Who sent His Messenger with the Guidance and the Truth to outstrip all the other ways of life, though the disbelievers are averse.
61.10	"O believers! Shall I show you a trade that will deliver you from a painful doom?"
61.11	Believe in Allah and His Messenger, and strive justly in the path of Allah with your properties and lives; that is most beneficent to you if you know.
61.12	He will forgive you your sins and will make you enter the paradises beneath which the rivers flow; and, the fragrant eternal Paradise of Adnu; that is the Mighty Blessing.
61.13	And there is another that you long for; the Help and the near Victory from Allah. So, give good omen to the believers!
61.14	O believers! Become helpers for Allah, as those  who said, "We are your helpers for Allah", when Isa, son of Maryam turned to his followers and said, "Who will help me for Allah!" Then, a party of the people of Israel accepted, and another party rejected; So, We helped the believers against their enemies - so, they became the victors.

Chapter 62
The Congregation

62.1	All that is in the heavens and the earth glorify Allah, the Sovereign, the Holy One, the Mighty, the Wise.
62.2	It is He Who sent to the people ignorant, a Messenger from among them that he may make clear His Signs to them and purify them, and that he may teach them the Book and impart Wisdom - lo! they were in manifest error before that.
62.3	And for the latter generations who have not yet joined them. He is the Mighty, the Wise. 
62.4	That is the Blessing of Allah; He Bestows it upon whom He is pleased with. And Allah is Grand Gracious.
62.5	The similitude of those who shall not rehearse the Book after its commandment, is as the likeness of the ass carrying loads of books. Wretched is the likeness of the people who deny the Signs of Allah. Allah guides not people who are evil.
62.6	Say: "O people of Israel, wish your death if you say you are dearer to God than any other people, and if you are truthful."
62.7	But they will never wish it for what their hands have sent forth. And Allah is All-Aware of the unjust.
62.8	Say: "The death - which you flee from shall surely meet you; then you will be returned unto Him, the Knower of the secrets and the plain. Then He will inform you of what you were doing."
62.9	O believers! When you are called for the congregation on the day decided, to strengthen allegiance to Allah, leave your trading, and hasten to remember Allah. That is better for you if you know.
62.10	Thus having strengthened your belief in Allah, spread out on the earth, seeking only Allah's grace. And, that you may be victorious, keep up the remembrance of Allah ever often.
62.11	Say, "And, among them are they who if they find an amusement or trade, they rush to it leaving you standing. What is with Allah is better than the fun and transactions; and, Allah is the Best Provider."

Chapter 63
The Hypocrites

63.1	The hypocrites come to you and say, "We will testify you are surely the Messenger of Allah." "Allah knows you are His Messenger." But Allah is a witness against them, says, "They are the lying hypocrites!"
63.2	They use their oaths as shield to bar from the path of Allah; verily, what they do is evil.
63.3	This is because they believed and then became unfaithful; so their hearts were sealed, and therefore they understand not.
63.4	If you see them their persons will surprise you, and when they speak you will give ears; but they are people like the uprooted tree, supported. They feel every single sound is against them - they are the enemies. So, 'ever be careful with them!' Allah will destroy them; where then do they turn?
63.5	And when it is said to them, "Come, Allah's Messenger seek pardon for you",  you will see them turning away their heads in pride.
63.6	Equal it is for them, whether you seek pardon for them or not. Verily, Allah will never forgive them; Allah will not guide the evil-living people.
63.7	Those are they who said, "Spend not for those with the Messenger of Allah until they part away from him." Allah's are the treasures of the heavens and the earth, but the hypocrites do not understand.
63.8	They say, "If we return to the city, the arrogant will surely drive the humble away from it." But all glory belong to Allah, His Messengers and the Believers - yet, the hypocrites do not understand.
63.9	O believers, let not your wealth and your children deviate you from the remembrance of Allah - and, whoever do so, they are the losers. 
63.10	Spend among yourselves from what We have blessed you with before the death comes upon one of you, and he says, "O my God, will you delay me this awhile? If so, I too will give charity and become of the good doers."
63.11	But Allah delays not to anyone if the Hour has reached - Allah is the Knower of that you do.

Chapter 64
The Loss

64.1	All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth praise the Glory of Allah. His is the Kingdom. His is the Praise. And He is powerful over everything.
64.2	He, it is who created you. There are among you who deny Him, and there are who believe in Him. And, Allah is Ever a Watcher over that you do.
64.3	He has created the heavens and the earth in Truth. And, He originated you, and fashioned you in the best formation. And unto Him is your abode.
64.4	He knows what is in the heavens and on the earth, and He knows what you hide and what you make plain; and, He Knows all in your breasts.
64.5	Has not the news come to your about the rejecters of faith, before? Then the suffered the penalty of their deeds; and, for them is a painful chastisement.
64.6	This is because their Messenger kept coming to them with sure Signs; then, they rejected and withdrew saying, "Shall a mortal guide us?" Allah is needless of them. And, Allah is Needless, All-Praiseworthy.
64.7    	The rejecters think they will not be raised up. Say; "Nay! By my God, you will be indeed raised up. Then you will be surely informed of that you used to do; and, that is easy for Allah."
64.8    	Therefore believe in Allah, and in His Messenger and the Light We have sent down. Allah is Well-Acquainted with all ye do.
64.9	The day of gathering - The Day He gathers ye all. That is the Day that brings loss. But whosoever believes in Allah and does righteous deeds - He will clear him of all his evils, and will cause them to enter the heavens beneath which rivers flow; they will abide therein forever. That is a Mighty Blessing.
64.10	But those who deny and cry lies to Our Signs are the inmates of Hell wherein they abide forever. What a wretched destination!
64.11	All incidences that happen about is not but by the leave of Allah; and, Allah guides the heart of him, who believes in Him. Allah is Well-Informed of everything.
64.12	So, follow Allah, and follow this Messenger; if you turn away withdrawing - what is with Our Messenger is, to reveal. 
64.13	Allah - there is no God but He; and in Allah let the believers put their trust.
64.14	O believers! Surely among your wives and children, are your enemies. Therefore, be guarded against them - and if you forgive, ignore and endure them, verily, Allah is Most Forgiving, Most Merciful. 
64.15	Trials are your wealth and children. But Allah, - with Him is the Reward, Mighty.
64.16	So, behave fearing Allah as much as possible, listen to what He says and follow Him; and, help among yourselves - that is better for you. And those who are saved from stinginess, are the victors.
64.17	If you loan Allah a virtuous loan, He would multiply it for you, and He will Forgive you. Allah is Appreciative, Forbearing.
64.18	Knower of the Unseen and Manifest. The Mighty. The Wise.

Chapter 65
The Divorce

65.1	O Prophet, say: "If you divorce your wives, pronounce it in such a manner, proper to calculate their waiting period. Fear Allah, your God; and, send them not from their houses except that they did indulge in open indecency, nor should they step out - such is the ordainment of Allah. Whoever disobeys Allah's Ordainment, he certainly harms himself. And you do not know that Allah may, even after this, create a way for them. 
65.2	Therefore, when the time draws close, then keep them honorably, or part from them honorably. And keep two righteous among you as witnesses and establish your testimony for Allah. That is a good tiding for those who believe in Allah and the Last Day. But, he who guides him fearing Allah, for him is the way from Him. 
65.3	For him, He Bestows expansive life from whence, he never expected. And whosoever put his trust in Allah, He shall suffice him. Verily, Allah attains His Purpose. Verily Allah has set a measure for everything.
65.4	And among your women if you doubt concerning their regular periods or those who have stopped menstruating - their waiting period is three months. And, for the carrying women their waiting period is until they bring forth their burden; and, whosoever fear Allah, He makes their life comfortable.
 65.5	This is Allah's Command, and He has sent it down. Whosoever fears Allah, He absolves him of his sins and makes his reward, glorious.
65.6    	Make the women live in your place according to your means, and trouble them not so as to make their life difficult; and, if they are pregnant fulfil their needs until they bring forth their burden; and, if they feed for you, be even more generous. Preserve justice among you; but if there is a difficulty, then another woman can feed.
65.7	Those who have a comfortable living, let them give liberally; but whosoever's life is straitened, let him give out of what Allah has provided him. And, Allah will not try anyone beyond what He has provided them - after the stress, soon Allah will bring ease.
65.8	How many a nation was insolent toward the command of its God and His Messengers - and, We reckoned it with a harsh reckoning and punished it severely.
65.9	Thus it suffered for its evil-works, and the end of its deeds were in loss.
65.10	Allah has prepared a painful punishment! So, the believers who know, fear Allah. Now Allah has sent down unto you, a reminder.
65.11	And, from Him a Messenger - He exemplifies Allah's Revelations to you, to bring forth the believing good-doers from darkness to light. And, Allah admits those who believe in Allah and does righteousness into paradises beneath which the rivers flow; therein their abode, eternal. Verily, Allah has given them a beautiful provision.
65.12	It is Allah who has Originated the seven heavens and of earth their like - that you may know, Allah indeed has power over and that He encompasses by His Wisdom, all things. And, between them constant are His Commands, descending.

Chapter 66
The Prohibition

66.1	O Prophet! Why have you prohibited that Allah has permitted for you, satisfying your companions? Allah is Most Forgiving, Most Merciful.
66.2	Allah has permitted you to break your covenants. Allah is your Master, and He is the Knowing, the Wise.(618)
	
66.3	And, when the Prophet confided some news to one of his wives, she revealed it; but Allah made it known to him. Of it, he made known some and ignored much of it. When he enquired certain of it, the woman said, "Who revealed it to you?" He said, "The All-Knowing and the All-Perceiving revealed it."
66.4	If only you two seek forgiveness for this from Allah, for both of your hearts have evidently inclined; and, if ye help each other against him, surely Allah is his Protector - and then, his helpers will be Jibreel, the good-hearted believers and the angels.
66.5	If he ever divorces you - Allah will replace you, giving him far better ones, who are - peace-loving, devout, pious, penitent, humble, traveling, widows and maids.
66.6	O believers! Protect you and your household from the Fire. Its fuels are humans and stones, over which are the angels, strong and severe; and, they disobey not in what Allah has Commanded them, but they do as they are Commanded.
66.7	O ye deniers! This day, say not any excuse. You are only being recompensed for what you were doing.
66.8	O believers, seek forgiveness from Allah; your God will remove you of your sins and make you enter the paradises beneath which the rivers flow; and, Allah will not disgrace the Prophet and those who believed with him on that Day. Their Light will far advance to their front and on their right. They will say, "Our God! Perfect us our Light and Forgive us. Lo! Thou art over all things, Able." 
66.9	O Prophet! Strive against the rejecters and the hypocrites, and be stern with them. Their refuge is the Hell, an evil destination.
66.10	Allah sets forth an example for those who disbelieve - the wife of Nuh and the wife of Lut. They were under two of Our faithful slaves, but they betrayed them. So, they availed them naught against Allah. And it was said, "Enter ye with those who enter the Fire!" 
66.11	And Allah sets forth an example to those who believe, the wife of Firaun. She said, "My God, grace me with a palace in the Heavens; save me from Firaun and his deeds; and, keep me from the people, unjust!"
66.12	And Maryam, the daughter of Imran: she has guarded her chasteness, so We breathed Our Ruh in her. And, she confirmed Our Words and the Scriptures and became of the obedient.




Chapter 67
The Kingdom

67.1	Blessed is He with whom is the Kingdom and He, over all things, Able.
67.2	He Created death and life to try you who of you is the best in deeds. He is the Mighty, the Forgiving.
67.3	It is He who Created the seven heavens in layers. You will not find a blemish in the Creation of the Benevolent. And, see again clearly. Do you find any defect?
67.4	And see again, and again - your vision will return to you fatigued and minimized.
67.5	And verily, We decorated the nearest sky with embellishments, and We made them flaming stones against Shaitans. And We have prepared for them the torment of blazing fire.
67.6	And whosoever rejects their God, for him is the punishment of Hell. That is an evil refuge.
67.7	When they are flung therein - its boiling sound, they will hear its disgusting noise.
67.8	It comes nigh with bursting anger. When each people was pushed therein, its guards will say to them: "Did the Warner not come to you?"
67.9	They will say, "Yes, indeed a Warner came to us; we cried lies saying, "Allah has not sent down anything; you are only in a great error."
67.10	They will say, "If only we had heard or listened, we would not have been among the companions of blazing fire."
67.11	They will accept their sins; so curse the companions of the Blaze.
67.12	Surely, those who fear their God in secret - there awaits them Forgiveness and a high Reward.
67.13	And, keep your word secret or proclaim - surely, He is the Knower of what is in the breasts.
67.14	Does not the Originator know? He is All-Subtle, All-Aware.
67.15	It is He who made this earth luxurious to you; spread out in all its directions and dwell under His Blessings. And your return is unto Him.
67.16	Are you without fear that He, the Sovereign would not cause you to plunge into the earth, the while it convulses?
67.17	Or are you without fear that the Sovereign will not send hailstorm against you? You will soon know how My Warning is.
67.18	And those who were before them were too denying; then, how was My warning? 
67.19	Do they not see above them, the birds flying with their wings spread out and closing. But for the Benevolent, naught holds them. Surely, He Sees everything.
67.20	Or who is this that shall be a host for you to help you but for the Benevolent? The rejecters are only in delusion.
67.21	Or, if He has stopped providing you, who will give them to you? Nay, but these persist in insolence and frowardness.
67.22	Who is better guided - the one who crawls fallen upon his face? Or the one who walks upright on a straight path?
67.23	Say: "It is He who Originated you and gave the listening and the vision, and the perceiving hearts; but very little do you show thanks."
67.24	It is He who made you spread throughout the earth, and unto Him you shall be mustered.
67.25	And they say: "When is the promise, if you are truthful?"
67.26	Say: "The knowledge is with Allah, and I am but a plain warner!"
67.27	Then, when they see it nigh at hand, the faces of the deniers will be awry, and it will be said, "This is that for which you were calling!"
67.28	Say: "Have you considered: whether Allah causes my death and those with me or grants us Mercy, who will save the disbelievers from the painful torment?"
67.29	Say: "He is the Most Benevolent. We believe in Him. And we put our trust on Him - soon you shall know who it is that is in clear error."
67.30	Say: "Have you considered: if your water is sucked into the earth, who will bring it forth as springs?"

Chapter 68
The Pen

68.1	Nun - By the pen and what they inscribe,(619)
	
68.2	By your God's Grace, thou art not insane.
68.3	And you will indeed receive the goodly reward, eternally.
68.4	And verily, you possess the grand soul.
68.5	So soon you will see, and they will see-
68.6	Which of you is insane;
68.7	Your God knows which of you is astray from His Way, and He knows well who is Guided.
68.8	So obey not the deniers.
68.9	They desire to compromise if you compromise.
68.10	And heed not every mean swearer;
68.11 	Every backbiter, slanderer;
68.12	Hinderer of the good, guilty aggressors, malefactor;
68.13	Cruel therewithal, base-born.
68.14	Because of his immense wealth and progenies,
68.15	When Our Signs are revealed to him, he says, "Tales of the ancients!"
68.16	We shall brand him on the snout.
68.17	Lo! We tried them as we tried the companions of the garden when they vowed they would pluck its fruits in the morning.(620)
68.18	And made no reservations.
68.19	So, while they were sleeping, the visitation from your God visited it.
68.20	And in the morning, it was a black, barren land.
68..21	In the morning they called to one another,
68.22	'Come forth betimes upon your tillage, if you would pluck!'
68.23	So, they departed whispering together,
68.24	'No poor man shall enter it today upon you!'
68.25	They went forth betimes, strong and determined-
68.26	But when they saw it, they said, "Lo! We are lost!"
68.27	"Nay, we are to suffer privation!"
68.28	Said the most moderate of them, "Did I not say, 'why do you not give glory?'"
68.29	They said, "Glorious is He, our God; we were indeed the people, evil."
68.30	Then they turned, one against another, in blaming.
68.31	They said, "Woe to us! We were indeed transgressors."
68.32	"Our God will exchange for this, even a better provision; and, we surely turn to our God."
68.33	Such is the punishment. And if they did but know, the punishment to come is greater.
68.34	Indeed, for the God-fearing, with their God are the Gardens of Bliss.
68.35	What, shall We make those who opt for peace as the criminals?
68.36	What has happened to you? How do you decide?
68.37	Or have you a Book wherein you read?
68.38	That you shall indeed have, through it whatever you decide?
68.39	Or do you have the covenant from Us that whatever you decide surely shall hold good for you until the Last Day?
68.40	Ask them, which of them will guarantee that!
68.41	Or do they have partners? If they speak truly, them let them bring their partners.
68.42	On the Day when they will lose the power of ankle, they will be called to obey the Commands - they will not be able to do.
68.43    	Disgrace will cover them even as they lowered their sights; but, there was constant call upon them to surrender to the command of Allah when they were healthy.
68.44	So, leave Me and those who belie this Hadiths - the Truth. We will draw them on little by little whence they know not.
68.45	And I shall respite them, but My decision is firm.
68.46	Or you asked them a wage, and so they are weighed down with debt?
68.47	Or is the Unseen theirs, and so they write down? 
68.48	So, wait for your God's call; become not as he, of the fish; and, when he called upon, in deep anguish,-
68.49    	Had his God's Mercy not reached him; he would have been cast upon the wilderness, being despised. 
68.50 	But his God chose him, and placed him among the righteous.
68.51	And when the rejecters hear you reminding, they indeed are well-nigh to strike you down with their glances. Surely he is a man possessed!
68.52	And it is naught but a reminder to all the worlds.

Chapter 69
The Inevitable Reality

69.1	The Inevitable Reality.
69.2	What is the Inevitable Reality?
69.3	And what will inform you what is the Inevitable Reality?
69.4	Samud and Aad cried lies to the Striking Calamity.
69.5	So, as for Samud, were destroyed by the Screamer.
69.6	And as for Aad, were destroyed by a violent wind, furious.
69.7	He compelled it against them seven nights and eight days unabated; so, you will find them overthrown as stumps of uprooted palm trees, fallen.
69.8	So, do you find any of them left?	
69.9	And Firaun, and those before him and the town overthrown did persist in evil.
69.10	And they disobeyed the Messenger of their God; so, He seized them with an extreme grip.
69.11	Lo! When the waters rose, We bore you upon the ship.
69.12	That you may reflect upon it, and that you may listen with care.
69.13	So, when the first call is blown;
69.14	And when the earth and the mountains are thrown out and made to crumble, crashing into each other;
69.15	Then, on that Day, the Inevitable shall come to pass.
69.16	And the sky will split asunder, for upon that day it shall be frail.
69.17	And the angels shall be on its boundary, and upon that Day eight shall bear the Command of thy God above them.
69.18	On that Day you shall be exposed; not one secret of yours concealed.
69.19	So, as for him who is given his record in his right hand, he will say, "Take, read my book!"
69.20	"Verily, I believed I shall have to meet my Reckoning!"
69.21	So, he shall be in a pleasing life.
69.22	In a Noble Garden,
69.23	Its clusters nigh to gather.
69.24	Eat and drink well pleased, for that you did long ago, in the days gone by.
69.25	But as for him who is given his record in his left hand, he will say: Lo! My record should not have been given to me!
69.26	"And I had not known the day of Reckoning."
69.27	"Would that it was all over?"
69.28	"My wealth has not availed me;
69.29	"My authority has gone for me."
69.30	"Seize him, and fetter him!"
69.31	"Then cast him into burning hell!"
69.32	"Then into a chain of seventy cubits' length insert him.
69.33	"He indeed did not believe in Allah, the Most High;
69.34	"Nor did he support the feeding of the needy;
69.35	"So, not for him this day, a friend;
69.36	"Neither any food saving foul pus;
69.37	"None will consume it but the sinners."(621)
69.38	So, I swear by that you see;
69.39	And by that you do not see.
69.40	Surely, this is the word from the Messenger, Noble.
69.41	And this is not the word of a poet; little do you believe.
69.42	Nor the speech of a soothsayer; little is it that ye receive.
69.43	A sending down from the God of the Worlds.
69.44	And, had he invented against Us any sayings-
69.45	We would have seized him by the right hand,
69.46	And then, severed his life-artery.
69.47	And not one of you could have held Us off from Him.
69.48	So, this is a reminder for the God fearing.
69.49	And We know there surely are those who deny among you.
69.50	And lo! It is a grief for the deniers.
69.51	And verily, this is the Truth of Certainty.
69.52	So, praise your God by His Attributes.

Chapter 70
The Ways of Ascent

70.1	A questioner questioned to know the chastisement about to happen.
70.2	Upon the rejecters, which none may avert.
70.3	From Allah's ways of ascent.
70.4	The angels and the Soul ascend unto Him in a day whose span is fifty thousand years.
70.5	So, endure with a goodly patience.
70.6	They indeed see it far away.
70.7	But We see it very near.
70.8	The sky will become as molter brass.
70.9	And the mountains, as cotton.
70.10	A friend will not enquire about another friend. 
70.11 	They will see it before their eyes - the sinner, on that day, will wish to ransom himself from the punishment of that day, by his children-
70.12	And his wife, and his brother-
70.13	His kindred who sheltered him-
70.14	And all that are on the earth, if then it might save him.(622)
70.15	Not so. For, verily it is a blazing fire.
70.16	Snatching away the scalp.
70.17	Calling him who withdrew and turned away.
70.18	Who amassed and hoarded.
70.19	Verily, man is every hasty.(623)
70.20	Fretful when an evil touches him.
70.21	And niggardly when a good touches him.
70.22	Except those who are devoted to righteousness.
70.23	And who are steadfast in righteousness.
70.24	And those in whose wealth, is a portion determined;
70.25	For those who seek and the needy.
70.26	And those who believe in the Last Day.
70.27	And those who fear the punishment of their God-
70.28	Verily, it is not that their God's punishment is not to be feared.
70.29	And those who guard their dignity,
70.30	Except from their companions and what their right hands own, for thus they are not blameworthy.
70.31	So, whoever trespass, they are the offenders.
70.32	And those who keep their pledges and their covenants-
70.33	And those who stand fast as witnesses;
70.34	And those who guard, by being prayerful,
70.35	Such will be in the gardens, dignified.
70.36	What is that with the rejecters? They rush towards you.
70.37	From the right and the left, in throngs.
70.38	Does every one of them desire to enter the blessed Paradise?
70.39	Nay, We indeed have created them from that they knew.(624)
70.40	So, 'By the God of the risings and the settings', We are able.  
70.41	That We will change a far better people in their place; none shall surpass Us.
70.42	So, let them play and plunge until the meet their Day, promised.
70.43	Verily, on that Day, they will hastily raise forth from the graves as racing to a destination.
70.44	Their sights will lie flat, the disgrace surrounding them; that is their promised Day.

Chapter 71
Nuh

71.1	We indeed sent Nuh to his people saying, "Warn your people before a chastising punishment comes upon them."
71.2	He said, "O my people, I am unto you a clear warner."
71.3	"Call upon Allah alone; fear Him, and obey me."
71.4	"He will forgive your sins, and He will respite you to an appointed term; and, when His time arrives for sure, it will not be delayed - if only you knew."
71.5	Then he said, "My God! Surely I called to my people by night and by day."
71.6	"But my call has only increased them in flight."
71.7	"And whenever I called them to Your forgiveness, they thrust their fingers into their ears; and, they covered them with their clothes. And they are obstinately arrogant and proud."
71.8	"Then I called to them with certainty."
71.9	"And then I spoke to them in open and in secret."
71.10	And I have said, "Ask forgiveness from your God. He indeed, is ever All-Forgiving."(625)
71.11	"He will loose heaven upon you in torrents.
71.12	"And He will succour you with wealth and children. And He will create gardens for you and create for you rivers.
71.13	"What is that with you that you look not for Grandeur in Allah!
71.14	"Surely He created you in various stages.
71.15	"Have you not given thought how He has created the seven heavens in layers?
71.16	"And He has set the moon therein as an Illumination and the sun as a Light. 
71.17	"And Allah fashioned you out of the earth.
71.18	"Then He will make you return unto the earth and raise you up again.
71.19	"And Allah has made the earth expansive for you.
71.20	"And made highways in it for your journey."
71.21	Nuh said, "My God, surely they disobey me; and, they follow those whose wealth and children have not increased them but in the loss."
71.22	"And they plot a mighty plot.
71.23	"And they say, 'leave not your deities; and, surely desert not Wadd, Suwaau, Yaghusu, Yaooq and Nasr'."
71.24	"And surely they have led many astray; so, increase not except the path astray for these unjust." 
71.25	Because of their sins they were drowned and then thrust into the Fire, for they found not besides Allah, any helper.
71.26	Then Nuh said, "My God! Leave not a single rejecter of them on this earth!"
71.27	"If you leave them, surely they will mislead Your servants; and, they will breed not except rejecting libertines."
71.28	"My God! Give forgiveness to me and my parents, and those who enter my house with belief, and the believing men and the believing women. And increase not the wicked in aught but destruction."

Chapter 72
The Jinns

72.1	Say: "It has been revealed to me that certain among the Jinns have listened and said, 'we surely heard an amazing Quran'."
72.2	'It shows the straight path, so we believe in it. And we will ascribe no partner to our God.'
72.3	'And exalted is the Nobleness of our God; He has taken neither wife nor son.'
72.4	'But the fools among us say unfair words against Allah.'
72.5	'And we were of the view that the men and jinn will never lie against Allah.'
72.6	'But the men among the human beings were indeed seeking refuge in men among the jinns, and so, increased them in their arrogance.
72.7	'And certainly they had thought as you think that Allah will never raise anyone up.'
72.8	'And we attempted towards the sky, and found it filled with stern guards and burning flames.'
72.9	'We used to sit at the vantage points to overhear; but now whoever tries so will find a fiery blaze in wait for him.' 
72.10	'And we indeed know not whether their God has destined punishment for those on the earth or has he intended for them guidance.'
72.11	'And surely with us are those who are righteous and those who are not so; moreover, we were followers of different sects.'
72.12	'And we understand that we cannot escape Allah in the earth, neither be able to frustrate Him by flight.'
72.13	'And we believed when we heard the guidance; therefore, whoever believes in his God will fear neither deprivation nor oppression.'
72.14	'And certainly among us that submit to Peace, and among us are the evil ones. Whosoever is inclined to peace are they who have attained guidance.'
72.15	The evildoers have become the firewood of Hell.
72.16	If they are steadfast upon the guidance, We will surely water them plentifully.(626)
72.17	That We might try them thereby. So, whoever turns away from the remembrance of his God, He will thrust him into severe chastisement.
72.18	And verily, heartfelt surrendering is only for Allah; so, Appreciate not anyone besides Allah.
72.19	And surely, when the servant of Allah turned to Him, they became about him in throngs.(627)
72.20	Say: "I only call upon my God, and I will not assign a partner unto Him.
72.21	Say: "I possess no power over you, either for hurt or for rectitude.
72.22    	Say: "Surely, no one can protect me from Allah, neither will I find a refuge besides Him.
72.23	Say: "But to reveal from Allah, and to convey His Messages. So, whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger, for him is the Hell-Fire, wherein such will abide.
72.24	Until, when they see that which they are promised, then they will know whose helpers are weaker and low in counts.
72.25	Say: "I know not whether what you are promised is nigh or my God has set a period for it."
72.26	The Knower of the Unseen! He reveals not His Unseen to anyone.
72.27	Except whom he has approved of the Messengers; and, assuredly He sends guards before him and guards behind him.
72.28    	For reassurance that they had plainly conveyed the Message of their God - and while He encompasses all they possess, He has controlled everything by numbers. 

Chapter 73
The One under the Covering

73.1	O you under the covering.
73.2	Keep up the remembrance during the night, except a little.
73.3	Relax in it a half or a little less in it.
73.4	Or a little more - and Quran, reflect upon it clear and composed.
73.5	Soon We shall surely send down upon you a Mighty Word.
73.6	Rising at night indeed merges with the Oneness and purifies the word.
73.7	Surely in the day you have prolonged activities.
73.8	But remember your God's Attributes and ever stay turned towards Him.
73.9	The God of the rising and setting; there is no God but He, and so, keep Him alone your refuge.
73.10	And bear with what they say and stay away from them as a dignified.
73.11	Leave Me to those who cry lies, those of ease; and, leave them to a respite.
73.12	Verily, with Us are the fetters and the Hell.
73.13	And food that chokes and painful torment.
73.14	On that Day the earth and the mountains shall rock violently and the mountains will become a heap of running sand.
73.15	Surely We have sent unto you a Messenger as a witness over you, even as We sent to Firaun a Messenger.
73.16	But Firaun did disobey the Messenger; so, We seized him with a severe penalty.
73.17	So, if you reject how you will save on that Day that will make even the children grey-headed?
73.18	The sky will split apart; His Promise shall be performed.
73.19	Verily, this is a reminder; so, whoever wills, may he follow the guidance towards his God.
73.20	Verily, your God knows that you and those with you do remember Allah, close to two-thirds of the night; or half therein; or one-third thereof. Allah is the appraiser of the day and the night, and He knows you shall not be able to value it; and, so He has turned unto you - therefore, recite Quran as clearly as possible that you might rehearse it. Again, He is aware there are those among you who are ill, who are journeying seeking Allah's grace, and those who strive in the cause of Allah. So, have ease as you reflect, keeping up in Allah's remembrance, while you ever involve in charity. And give a beautiful loan for Allah's sake. Whatever you send forth for you, as good deeds, you will find it with Allah, a thing most grand, and a wage most noble. And seek forgiveness from Allah. Verily, Allah is Most Forgiving, Most Merciful.

Chapter 74
The One in the Garment

74.1	O thou in the garment,
74.2	Raise up and warn!
74.3	And glorify your God.
74.4	Keep your garments neat.
74.5	And impiety abhor!
74.6	Help not expecting to gain greater.
74.7	And for your God, be patient.
74.8	And when the Call will be made,
74.9	That Day will be the hardest one.
74.10	For the deniers, not easy.
74.11	Leave Me to him whom I have created alone.
74.12	And I gave him expansive wealth;
74.13	And children to be by his side!
74.14	And furnished for him, all easiness.
74.15	But he desires I add him more to it.(628)
74.16 	Nay! He indeed is insolent towards our Messages.
74.17	Soon I shall make him ascend to a deadly peak.
74.18	He indeed plotted and acquired;
74.19	Death seize him! How he could acquire!
74.20	And so, death seize him! How he could acquire!
74.21	And he plotted again;
74.22	Then he was angry, and mad.(629)
74.23	Then he turned away and became arrogant.(630)
74.24	Then he said, "It is naught but a bewitching magic!"
74.25	And, "It is not but the words of a mortal being!"
74.26	I will cause him to enter the 'Saqar!'   
74.27	And what will inform you what 'Saqar' is!
74.28	It leaves naught; it spares naught.
74..29	It disfigures!
74.30	Over it are nineteen. 
74.31	And We have not placed as guards over the Saqar-hell but the angels. And We have made their numbers as only a test to those who reject - that the people of the Book may confirm, and the believers may strengthen their affirmation; and, that the people of the Book and the believers may not doubt. And that those in whose hearts is disease and the disbelievers shall say, "What does Allah intend by this as an example?" Thus Allah sends astray whom He will; and, guides whom He will. And none will know your God's hosts except Him. And this is naught else than a Reminder unto humanity.
74.32	Nay. And I swear by the Moon;
74.33	And, by the Night - as it withdraws;
74.34	And, by the dawn - as it brightens;
74.35	It indeed, is one of the mightiest things.
74.36	As a warning to the humanity;
74.37	whoso among you wish to go forward or withdraw.
74.38	Each one is held in pledge for that he earns.
74.39	But for the companions of the right hand;
74.40 	In the gardens - they will exchange.
74.41	Concerning the sinners;
74.42	What made you enter the Saqar-hell?
74.43	They will say, "We were not in the Remembrance of Allah,
74.44	"And we did not feed the poor,
74.45	"We stayed drowned with the drowned,
74.46	"And we were denying this Day of Reckoning -
74.47	"Until the certainty reached us."
74.48	So, intercessions of intercessors shall avail them naught.
74.49	Then what is with them that they turn away from the Reminder?
74.50	As if they were frightened asses.
74.51	Fleeing - before a lion.
74.52    	But each man of them desires he received a spread out scripture. 
74.53	No, they did not fear the Hereafter.
74.54	Not so, verily this is a Reminder.
74.55	Then whoever wills shall remember it.
74.56	But unless Allah wills, they shall not perceive; He is worthy to be feared. He is worthy to Forgive.


Chapter 75
The Hereafter

75.1	I swear by the Day of Resurrection;
75.2	And, by the cursing Soul;
75.3	Does man think We cannot assemble his bones?
75.4	Nay, We can perfect his very fingertips. 
75.5	Nay, man desires to give the lie to what is before him.
75.6	He says, "When is the Day of Resurrection?"
75.7	So, when the sight becomes dizzy;
75.8	And the moon becomes hazy;
75.9	The sun and the moon will be merged.
75.10	On that Day, man will say, 'Whither to flee?'
75.11	Alas, no refuge!
75.12	On that Day, the place of refuge is only with thy God.
75.13	On that Day, man will be informed of what he has sent before and left behind.
75.14 	Nay, man is ever a witness against himself.
75.15	Even though he puts forth his excuses.
75.16	So move not your tongue in haste.
75.17	Indeed, upon Us is the putting together thereof and guiding thereby.
75.18	So, when We establish it a Guidance, follow the Guidance.
75.19	Then upon Us is its revelation.
75.20	But ye, people, impulsive.
75.21	So, you ignore the Hereafter.
75.22	Upon that Day, the faces shall be radiant.
75.23	Looking toward their God.
75.24	And upon that Day the faces shall be dark.
75.25	Certain of a wreaking Calamity to befall them.
75.26	Nay, when, reaches the throat.
75.27	Said: "Which is the magician?"
75.28	But he is sure that it is the parting.
75.29	And ankle will intwine with ankle.
75.30	On that Day, is the driving toward your God.
75.31	For he neither believed, nor did he humble.
75.32	But he cried it lies, and he turned away.
75.33	Then he joined his folks, proud.
75.34	Be cursed! Curse be upon you.
75.35	Then be cursed! And curse be upon you.
75.36	Does man think he will be left roam at will?
75.37	Was he not a despised drop, emitted?
75.38	Then He raised him to a higher degree, then he Created him in perfection.
75.39	Then from it He Created the companions: the male and female.
75.40	Is He not able to give life to the dead?

Chapter 76
The Man
	
76.1	Has not there been upon man a while in the space in which he was nothing to be mentioned?(631)
76.2	Verily We created man from a drop essence! And that We shall try him, we made him hearing and seeing.(632)
76.3	Surely We showed him the Way for which he is either grateful or ingrate.
76.4	Verily We had prepared for the rejecters: the chains and shackles, and the burning Hell-Fire.
76.5	Surely the righteous will drink of a cup whose mixture is Camphor.
76.6	It is a Spring wherefrom the servants of Allah will drink and they will make way for its flow abundantly.(633)
76.7	They are those who fulfilled their promises. They feared the Day whose evil will be spread out.
76.8	And for the love of Him, they will feed the needy, the orphans and the prisoner.
76.9	We feed you only for the pleasure of Allah, and we desire not recompense from you, no thankfulness. 
76.10	For we fear from our God a Day of wrath and distress.
76.11	So Allah will deliver them from the distress of the Day and give them radiance and joy.
76.12	And rewarded them for their patience, the gardens and silk garments.
76.13	They will recline upon the couches; therein they shall neither see sun nor chill.
76.14	The shades thereof will be close upon them, and the clustered fruits thereof will bow low.
76.15	Goblets of silver will be passed around them, and beakers of crystal.
76.16	Crystal clear -  beakers made of silver, to an exact measure.
76.17	And they will be offered to drink a cup mixed with Zanjabil. 
76.18	And therein is a spring, called Salsabeel. 
76.19    	Immortal youths shall go about them; you would think them be scattered pearls.
76.20	And if you could see, you will see therein pleasant bounties and the Grand Kingdom.
76.21	Upon them will be garments of green silk and brocade, and they will be decked with silver bracelets; and, their God will give them to drink a pure drink.
76.22	Behold, this is a  reward for you, and your striving is appreciated.
76.23	Surely it is We who sent down this Quran upon you by stages.
76.24	So wait for the Command of your God and obey not any of the sinners or ingrates.
76.25	Keep purifying the Attributes of your God, morning and evening.
76.26	And during the night surrender to Him and glorify His Attributes through the livelong night.(634)
76.27	They indeed desire to hasten, and so, they leave behind them their day, laden.(635)
76.28	It is We who created them and preserved their standard; and, if We wish we will exchange their likes.
76.29	Surely this is an admonition. So he who will, take guidance towards his God.
76.30	Yet, unless Allah wills you shall not. Allah indeed, is Most Knowing, Most Wise.
76.31	He admits to His Grace whom He will, and for the wrong-doers He has prepared a painful chastisement.

Chapter 77
Those sent forth

77.1	By that sent forth in gusts,
77.2	By the wind that blows furiously,
77.3	By the dispersers dispersing,
77.4	By those who distinguish,
77.5	By those who set forth thinking -
77.6	Forgiveness or warning;
77.7	Surely that which is promised to you shall befall.
77.8	And when the stars shall be extinguished,
77.9	And when heaven shall be split,
77.10	And when the mountains are blown away,
77.11	And when the time is appointed for the Messengers -
77.12	Until when are they delayed?
77.13	Till the Day of Judgment.
77.14	Which will inform you what the Day of Judgment is.
77.15	On that Day, woe to them who deny -
77.16	Did We not annihilate those before you?
77.17	And then, We will make the latter to follow -
77.18	Thus is Our Way with the criminals.
77.19	On that Day, woe to them who deny -
77.20	Did We not create you from mean drop?
77.21	Then We planted it in a place, secure.
77.22	For a term determined.
77.23	Thus made; excellent Makers are We.
77.24	On that Day, woe to them who deny -
77.25	Have We not made the earth embracing you?
77.26	For those alive and the dead?
77.27	And We firmly set therein souring mountains, and sated you with sweet water.
77.28	On that Day, woe to them who deny -
77.29	Depart to that to which you cried lies.
77.30	Proceed toward the threefold shadow.
77.31	No cooling nor shelter from the blaze.
77.32	Surely it throws sparks as huge mansions.
77.33	It will indeed be like yellowish camels.
77.34	On that Day, woe to them who deny -
77.35	This is the Day they cannot speak;
77.36	Neither be permitted to say excuses.
77.37	On that Day, woe to them who deny -
77.38	This is the Day of Judgment, We have gathered you and the men of old - 
77.39	So, if you have plot, then plot against Me.
77.40	On that Day, woe to them who deny -
77.41	Indeed, the God-fearing will be amid the shades and springs.
77.42	And such fruits as they love to taste.
77.43	Eat and drink pleasantly for that ye did.
77.44	Surely thus do We reward the good-doers.
77.45	On that Day, woe to them who deny -
77.46	"Eat and take your joy a little -  you are sinners!"
77.47	On that Day, woe to them who deny -
77.48	When it is said to them, "Humble,! They will not!".
77.49	On that Day, woe to them who deny -
77.50	So, which Hadith-Reminder will they follow after this?

Chapter 78
The Great News

78.1	Of what do they ask one another?
78.2	Of the tidings of the Unseen.
78.3	On which they are at variance.
78.4	Nay, they will soon come to know.
78.5	Again, they will soon come to know.
78.6	Have We, not well-spread the earth?
78.7	And caused the mountains, fount-heads?
78.8	And We made you, companions.
78.9	And We made your sleep, repose.
78.10	And We made the night, a garment.
78.11	And made the day, your living.
78.12	And made above you, the resolute seven.
78.13	And We appointed a guiding light.
78.14	And We sent down the torrents from the dark clouds.
78.15	To bring out the grains and plants thereof.
78.16	And the gardens luxuriant.
78.17	Verily, the Day of Judgment, is time-prepared.
78.18	Upon the Call, you will come forth in ranks.
78.19	And the sky will open into gateways.
78.20	The mountains shall vanish and become as a mirage.
78.21	Surely, the Hell is awaiting,
78.22	An abode for the transgressors.
78.23	While abiding therein eternally -
78.24	They will not taste therein coolness nor drink. 
78.25	Save scalding water and pus.
78.26	Just recompense.
78.27	For lo! They were never of the belief in the Reckoning.
78.28	And they belied Our Signs, crying lies to them.
78.29	And We have registered everything in a record.
78.30	So taste! We shall not increase for you aught, save, the torment.
78.31	Verily, for the God-fearing, is a grand victory.
78.32	Gardens and vineyards.
78.33	Pure-hearted companions of equal ranks.
78.34	And a full cup.
78.35	Therein they shall hear no vain utterances, nor cry of lies.
78.36	A high-reward from your God with a reckoning, just.
78.37	The God of the heavens and the earth, and everything in between: the Most Bountiful - none shall have the power to speak to Him.
78.38	On the Day when the Soul and the Angels stand in ranks - none shall speak except whom the Bountiful allows; and, he will speak the Truth.
78.39	That is the True Day. So whoever wills, may he, take unto His God, a resort.
78.40	Surely, We warn you of an impending torment; the man will see on that day what his hands have sent forth; and, the rejecters will say. "Woe to me! I should have been dust."



Chapter 79
Those who pull out

79.1	By those who force capture,
79.2	By those who wind up with ease,
79.3	And by those who swim, gliding,
79.4	And by those who race in advance.
79.5	By those who govern every affair.
79.6	On that Day when there are convulsions in succession;
79.7	And the successions shall continue-
79.8	Hearts on that Day, shall tremble.
79.9	Their eyes shall lie flat.
79.10	They say, "Will we indeed be restored to our original state?"
79.11	"What, after our bones have become decomposed?"
79.12	"If so, that restoration will be a great loss!"
79.13	But that shall be a single Call.
79.14	And behold! they will be raised up.
79.15	"Did Musa's 'Hadith-history' reached you?"
79.16	When his God called to him in the sacred valley of Thua-
79.17	"Go to Firaun! Surely he has transgressed;
79.18	And say, "If he still has the mind to repent."
79.19	"Then I will show you the Way toward God, and you will become fearing."
79.20	So, Musa showed him a great Sign.
79.21	But he denied and disobeyed.
79.22	Then he turned away and strived.
79.23	Then he gathered and proclaimed.
79.24	"I am your God, Most High!"(636)
79.25	Allah seized him with the punishment for the ultimate from the start.
79.26	Surely therein is a Sign for the God-fearing.
79.27	Are you stronger in Creation or the sky He built?
79.28	He raised its vault and ordered it.
79.29	He made its night dark and its day bright.
79.30	Then He spread out the earth.
79.31	Therefrom He brought forth its waters and its pastures.
79.32	And the mountains He set firm.
79.33	A provision for you and your cattle.
79.34	So, when the greatest Catastrophe comes;
79.35	Upon the day when man shall remember what he has striven.
79.36	Then Hell will stand forth to him who sees.
79.37	Then as for him who was insolent -
79.38	And chose the worldly pleasures -
79.39	Lo! Hell is the abode.
79.40	And as for him who has guarded from low desires, fearing to stand before his God -
79.41	Lo! The Paradise is the abode!
79.42	They will ask you about the Hour: when it shall berth.
79.43	What art thou about, to mention it?
79.44	Its decision rests with your God.
79.45	Thou art but a warner unto him who fears it.
79.46	Lo! On the Day when they see it they shall know they had not tarried for a part of the evening or morning.





Chapter 80
He Frowned

80.1	He frowned and turned away,
80.2	Because the one who cannot perceive came to him,
80.3	But do you perceive he might have had the clarity?
80.4	Or the admonition would have reminded him to his benefit.
80.5	But he who disregards - 
80.6	Unto him you pay regard; 
80.7	Yet, it is not your concern if he purifies not.
80.8	But as for him who came to you earnestly,
80.9	Fearing-
80.10	You turn away from him.
80.11	Nay! Because verily, this is an admonishment.
80.12	So, whoever is earnest, will remember.
80.13	In the Books, Noble.
80.14	Placed High; Preserved Pure.
80.15	Recorded by the Recorders;
80.16	Noble, Righteous.
80.17	Woe to man! What an ingrate!
80.18	From which He created him?
80.19	Created him from a drop, and perfected-
80.20	And He made his way Easy.
80.21	Then He causes him to die and makes him dust.
80.22	Then He will raise him again when He Will.
80.23	No, man has not fulfilled His bidding.
80.24	So let man consider his food.
80.25	Verily, it is We who send down the rain;
80.26	Then We cleave the earth, rendering it apart;
80.27	Then We caused the grain to grow therein.
80.28	And vines and vegetables;
80.29	And olive and dates;
80.30	And dense gardens;
80.31	And fruits and eatables;
80.32	That it shall be fruitful to you and your cattle.
80.33	So when the mighty Call is sounded;
80.34	At that moment, man will take to flight; leaving his brother-
80.35	Abandoning his mother, father-
80.36	Deserting his wife and children-
80.37	On the Day, to each one his situation will be enough.
80.38	On the Day, some faces will be bright;
80.39	Brilliantly radiant and joyous.
80.40	But on the Day, some other's faces will be dusty;
80.41	Stark darkness will cover them;
80.42	They are the rejecters, the evil ones.

Chapter 81
The Overthrowing

81.1	When the sun is covered up,
81.2	And when the stars shall fall,
81.3	And when the mountains are overthrown,
81.4	And when the habitation straitens,
81.5	And when the wild animals are mustered,
81.6	And when the seas are aflame,
81.7	And when the Souls are gathered,
81.8	And when there is the questioning - why it was buried alive,
81.9	As to the reason why it was killed,
81.10	And when their deeds are made open, 
81.11	And when the sky is removed,
81.12	And when Hell is set blazing,
81.13	And when Heaven is brought nigh,
81.14	Each will know what it has brought with it.
81.15	So, By that which withdraws-
81.16	That which advances shall vanish.
81.17	And By the night that recedes,
81.18	And By the Sighing of morning freshness -
81.19	Surely, this is the Word from  a Messenger, Noble.
81.20	Powerful, being in mighty rank with the All-Sovereign.
81.21	Honorable, trustworthy.
81.22	And your companion is not mad.
81.23	He indeed saw him while he was crystal clear.
81.24	And he does not hesitate to reveal of the Unseen.
81.25	And it is not the word of the accursed Shaitan.
81.26	Whither then go ye?
81.27	It is an admonition to people of all the worlds-
81.28	To him who wishes the Straight Path.
81.29	Yet, you shall not seek it unless Allah, the God of the worlds Wish.


Chapter 82
The Cleaving

82.1	When the sky is cleft asunder,
82.2	And when the stars fall,
82.3	And when the seas are swept aside,
82.4	And when the graves are opened,
82.5	Each soul shall know what it has sent forth and what it has left behind?
82.6	O man! What deceived you from obeying your God, the Most Generous?
82.7	He Originated you, Created you, and Perfected you.
82.8	He positions you, in the status He decides.
82.9	Yet, you deny the Hour.
82.10	And surely, over you are the guards.
82.11	The Noble, Recorders.
82.12	They know what you do.
82.13	Surely the righteous will be in the Paradise 'Nayeem'.
82.14	And the evil-doers will be in Hell.
82.15	They shall enter it on the Day of Execution.
82.16	And they shall not hide away from it.
82.17	Which will inform you of the Day of Execution?
82.18	And which will inform you of the Day of Execution?
82.19	On the Day one shall not avail another; on that Day, Allah's is the Sovereignty.

Chapter 83
The Stinter

83.1	Woe to the stinters,
83.2	When they buy from the people they take in full measure;
83.3	But when they give, they reduce the measure and weight.
83.4	Have they not considered they shall surely be raised up?
83.5	For a Mighty Day-
83.6	When man will stand before the God of all worlds-
83.7	So, the record of the evil-doers is in Sijjin.
83.8	Which will inform you of what Sijjin is-
83.9	It is a sealed record of the deeds.
83.10	On that Day, woe to them who deny -
83.11	They cry lies to the Day of Judgment.
83.12	And none shall cry lies to it, save the insolent transgressor.
83.13	When Our Inspirations are revealed plain, he says, "Tales of the ancients!"
83.14	Not so! But what they earned has rusted upon their hearts.
83.15	No indeed, upon that Day, they shall be veiled from their God.
83.16	Then, verily, they shall burn in Hell.
83.17	Then it will be said, "This is that you cried lies to."
83.18	Nay, But the Record of the Righteous is in Illiyyun.
83.19	Which will inform you of what Illiyyun is.
83.20	It is a Sealed Record of the good deeds.
83.21	The Near ones shall be its witness.
83.22	Surely the righteous will be in the Paradise Nayeem.
83.23	They will be witnessing in Peace.
83.24	You will recognize from their brilliance endowed faces.
83.25	They will be given to drink of the juices from the purest fruits.
83.26	Its seal is Pristine; so, whoever wills let them wish.
83.27	And its taste is of Tasneem.
83.28	It is a gushing Spring; and, of it the Near ones will drink.
83.29	The criminals, surely were mocking at the believers.
83.30	And when them, passed them by, pass mocking glances - one to another.
83.31	And when they return to their households, they return with pride.
83.32	And when they see they will say: "Surely, these are them in error."
83.33	"They have not been sent as Guardians."
83.34	But on that Day, the believers will have the last laugh at them.
83.35	They will be witnessing in Peace.
83.36	"Have the rejecters been recompensed for that they used to do?"

Chapter 84
Splitting Asunder

84.1	When the sky is split asunder,
84.2	And as commanded, when it submits to its God,
84.3	And when the earth is spread vast-
84.4	And when it casts forth all in it and empties-
84.5	And as commanded, when it submits to its God,
84.6	O Man, you strive toward your God with a firm striving, and you will meet Him.
84.7	So whose record of his deeds is given in his right hand,
84.8	His questioning will be easy;
84.9	And he will return to his people in joy.
84.10	But whose record is given behind his back,
84.11	He will cry, 'Woe to me!'
84.12	And he will burn in Hell.
84.13	Surely he joyously lived with his people.
84.14 	He was of the surety, 'I will never return!'
84.15	Nay, his God indeed was ever watchful of him.
84.16	And I swear by the setting glow of the ruddy sky-
84.17	And by the night, and that it gathers.
84.18	And by the full moon-
84.19	You shall indeed be raised in ranks by stages.
84.20	So what ails them, that they believe not!
84.21	And when guided are they by the Signs, they submit not to the guidance. 
84.22	But the rejecters cry lies.
84.23	And Allah knows all well that they conceal;
84.24	Warn them of a painful torment.
84.25    	Save those who believed and were righteous - for them is a goodly wage, eternal.

Chapter 85
The Planets

85.1	By the sky holding the planets,
85.2	And by the promised Day,
85.3	And by the witness and upon the witnessed,
85.4	Killed were the Men of the Pit-Fire,
85.5	The fire abounding in fuel.
85.6	When they sat by it,
85.7	And were themselves witnesses of what they did to the believers;
85.8	They avenged them not but for that, they believed in Allah, the All-Mighty, the All-Laudable. 
85.9	Unto Him is the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth; so, Allah is the witness over all things.
85.10	Those who are not in penitence over their persecution of the believing men and believing women, indeed, for them is the doom of Hell; and, the doom of burning Fire.
85.11	But those who are believing and righteous, for them are the Paradises beneath which rivers flow. And that is a Great Attainment.
85.12	Surely severe is the Grip of your God.
85.13	Verily, He it is who Originates, and Creates.
85.14	And He is Most Forgiving, Most Kind.
85.15	Sovereignty is His, the Magnanimous.
85.16	Effecter of what He Will.
85.17	Has the Hadith-the Truth of the army reached you?
85.18	Of Firaun and Samud?
85.19	But the rejecters persist in crying lies.
85.20	And Allah encompasses them from behind.
85.21	Nay, this is Quran, the Noblest.
85.22	Preserved in the Noble Soul.

Chapter 86
The Night Star

86.1	By the sky and the Night Star,
86.2    	What shall inform you, what the Night Star is!
86.3	The piercing star!
86.4	It is not that the soul is without a Guard, guiding.
86.5	Let man consider from what he was created.
86.6	From a drop, of the ejected.
86.7	It is created from the spine and the ribs.
86.8	Verily He is the Reviver.
86.9	Upon the Day when the secrets shall be laid open.
86.10	Man shall have no strength no helper.
86.11	 By the sky of torrents.
86.12	And By the earth sprouting.
86.13	Surely this is the word distinguishing.
86.14	And this is no vanity.
86.15	Surely they plot a plot.
86.16	And I do plot.
86.17	So allow respite to the rejecters, a while.

Chapter 87
The Most High

87.1	Exalt the Attributes of God, the Most High.
87.2	He created you in perfection.
87.3	And He measures and guides.
87.4	And brings forth the pastures.
87.5	Then makes them humus.
87.6	We will inspire you the Quran, so you shall not forget it.
87.7	Except what Allah will; surely He knows what you reveal and what you conceal.
87.8	And We will ease you with the easiest.
87.9	So if the Reminder avails, then Remind.
87.10	The God-fearing will avail it forthwith.
87.11	But the most hapless will flout it.
87.12	He will enter the great Fire.
87.13	No death for him therein nor life.
87.14	Whoever purifies, succeeds.
87.15	And he is constant in his remembrance and glorifying the Attributes of God.
87.16	But you choose the life of this world.
87.17	While the life of the Hereafter is lively and lasting.
87.18	Surely it is in the Scriptures before-
87.19	In the Scriptures of Ibrahim and Musa.

Chapter 88
The Overwhelming

88.1	Have you received the Hadith-warning of the Overwhelming?
88.2	Upon the Day faces will look humbled.
88.3	They indulged, persisted.
88.4	They shall enter Blazing Fire.
88.5	Watered at a boiling fountain.
88.6	There is no food for them except the poisonous vegetations.(637)
88.7	It will neither fatten nor satisfy hunger.
88.8	Faces on that Day, blithe.
88.9	With their striving well-pleased.
88.10	In a sublime garden.
88.11	Wherein they shall here not vain talks.
88.12	Wherein is a flowing Spring.
88.13	Wherein are couches raised.
88.14	And goblets set at hand.
88.15 	And well-placed cushions.
88.16	And carpets outspread.
88.17	Will they not regard the camel, how they are created?
88.18	And the sky- how it is raised?
88.19	And the mountains- how they are planted firm?
88.20	And the earth- how it is expansive?
88.21	So remind them, you are only a reminder.
88.22	You are not a watcher over them.
88.23	But he who turns his back, and rejects,
88.24	Then Allah will punish him with direst punishment.
88.25	Indeed, to Us is their return.
88.26	Then indeed, upon Us is their account.

Chapter 89
The Dawn

89.1	By the Dawn,
89.2	By the Ten Nights,
89.3	By the twos and one,
89.4	And by the Night that recedes,
89.5	Are there not the truth, for the knowing?
89.6	Have you not seen how your God did with Aad?
89.7	Iram- of the pillars?
89.8	The likes of whom were never created, in all the land.
89.9	And Samud, who hollowed the rocks in the valley.
89.10	And Firaun the lord of the hosts.
89.11	Who were rebellious in the lands.
89.12	And worked much corruption therein?
89.13	So your God unleashed on them lashes of punishment.
89.14	Surely your God is All-Watchful.
89.15	But when God tests him with His abundance, dignifying - he says, "My God has ennobled Me."
89.16	But when he tries him restricting his provisions, he says, "My God has despised me!"
89.17	Nay, you honour not the orphans,
89.18	And you urge not on the feeding of the poor,
89.19	And your devour others' properties wrongfully,
89.20	And ye love wealth with abounding love,
89.21	No, when the earth is pounded, crushed and powdered.
89.22	When your God, and the angels come rank upon rank;
89.23	Upon the Day, when the Hell is brought forth-  on the Day, man will remember, but to what avail is his remembrance?
89.24	He shall say, "O would that I had forwarded for my life!"
89.25	But none shall punish as He punishes on that Day.
89.26	And none shall bind as he binds.
89.27 	"O, Soul at Peace!
89.28	"Return to thy God, well-pleased, well-pleasing!
89.29	"Enter thou among My servants!
89.30	"Enter thou My Paradise!"

Chapter 90
The City

90.1	I swear by this City,
90.2	While ye abide in this City,
90.3	And by your parents and progenies, 
90.4	Indeed, We created man in straitness.
90.5	Does he think none has power over him?
90.6	"I destroyed much of the resources!"
90.7	"Does he think none has seen him?"
90.8	"Have We given him not two eyes?"
90.9	"And a tongue and two lips?"
90.10	And We showed him the two ways.
90.11	But he got not across the 'Aqaba'.
90.12	Which will inform you what 'Aqaba' is.
90.13	Setting free of a slave-
90.14	Or giving food on the day of hunger.
90.15	To an orphan near of kin.
90.16	Or a needy man in misery.
90.17	Then being of those who enjoin belief and patience to one another and enjoin the generosity of their God to one other. 
90.18	They are the Companions of the Right Hand.
90.19	And those who reject Our Signs are the Companions of the Left Hand,
90.20	Over them is  a Fire covered down.

Chapter 91
The Sun

91.1	By the Sun and its morning brightness,
91.2	And, By the moon that follows,
91.3	And, By the breaking of the dawn,
91.4	And, By the Covering down night,
91.5	And, By the Sky and upon which it rests,
91.6	And, By the earth and the vastness of its make,
91.7	And, By the perception and its perfection,
91.8	And that He taught the distinguishing- the right and the wrong.
91.9	Surely successful is He who uses it.
91.10	And loss is his who slights it.
91.11	Samud, belied it in their insolence.
91.12	When the basest of them broke forth.
91.13	The messenger of Allah said to them: "The She-camel of Allah; or, her drink!"
91.14	But they cried him lies and hamstrung her, so their God rumpled them for their sins and leveled them.
91.15	He cared not their End.

Chapter 92
The Night

92.1	By the Night that surrounds,
92.2	And, By the Day that brings shine,
92.3	And, By the creation of male and female,
92.4	Surely your efforts are in diversity.
92.5	So he who gives and fears God,
92.6	And testifies to the good deeds,
92.7	We will cause him easiness to his ease.
92.8	But he who is stingy and thereby considers himself needless,
92.9	And he who falsifies the good deeds
92.10	We will ease him toward the hardest way.
92.11	So his wealth shall not avail him when he falls.
92.12	Truly, Ours is the Guidance.
92.13	And, with Us is the latter and the former.
92.14	So, I warn you of the Blazing Fire!
92.15	None but the most wretched will burn therein.
92.16	He who cried lies and turned away.
92.17	Far removed from it will be the righteous.
92.18	He who purifies by giving of his wealth.
92.19	Even as he has no obligation to return a favour for anything.
92.20	Only for the pleasure of his God, the Most High!
92.21	Soon they will be satisfied.

Chapter 93
The Forenoon

93.1	By the Forenoon,
93.2	And, By the Night, still,
93.3	Your God has neither forsaken you nor hates you,
93.4	What is in the offing is better for you than what has gone by.
93.5	Your God will soon reward you, and you will be satisfied.
93.6	Did He not secure thee when when He found thee an orphan?
93.7	And, Guided not when you were without a way?
93.8	And, found you not needy, and made you needless?
93.9	So, be not harsh towards the orphans-
93.10	And, turn not away a suppliant.
93.11	And, evidence them the Grace of your God. 

Chapter 94
The Expansion

94.1	Have We not expanded you your heart?
94.2	And We freed you from your burden.
94.3	It was weighing down your back.
94.4	And, We raised you in Wisdom. 
94.5	Surely, with hardship is ease;
94.6	Truly, with hardship is ease.
94.7	So, when you wear out, Return striving.
94.8	And, with the whole-hearted Returning to your God.

Chapter 95
Fruits

95.1	By the fig, the olive,
95.2	By the Pact of Sinai,
95.3	And, By the Secured city,
95.4	Verily, We created man, in wonders.
95.5	Then We cast him in meanders.
95.6	Save those who believed and strived righteous - for them is the Lasting Reward.
95.7	So what yet causes you to deny the Lasting Day.
95.8	Is not Allah The Best of the judges?

Chapter 96
The Loftiness

96.1	Know by the Attributes of your God, the Originator!
96.2	He Originated humanity from the Loftiness.
96.3	Know that your God is the Most Generous.
96.4	He taught you by the pen.
96.5	He taught men what he knew not.
96.6	Nay, but man surely transgresses.
96.7	When he feels self sufficient.
96.8	Indeed to your God is the return.
96.9	Have you seen him who prevents -
96.10	A servant - when he submits to God?
96.11	Have you seen if he were upon Guidance-
96.12	Or enjoins piety?
96.13	Have you seen him - he denies turns away?
96.14	Does he know not that Allah sees?
96.15	Nay, if he desist not, verily We will seize him by the forelock,
96.16	A lying sinful forelock.
96.17	Then let him summon his council,
96.18	We shall summon the guards of Hell.
96.19	Obey him not! And surrender to God, and draw near.

Chapter 97
The Night Power

97.1	Verily We sent it down on the Night of Power!
97.2	And which will inform you what the Night of Power is!
97.3	The Night of Power is greater than a thousand months!
97.4	Therein descend the Soul and the Angels with every affair by the leave of their God.
97.5	With Peace, and it shall last until the dawn.

Chapter 98
Clear Sign

98.1	It is that those who reject among the people of the Book and those who associate, do not leave off, until Clear Sign should come to them.
98.2	The Messenger from Allah recites to them the Signs of the Pure Book.
98.3	Wherein are the Signs Ever-Lasting.
98.4	And the people of the Book scattered not until, excepting after the clear Signs came to them.
98.5    	The ordainment is not but that they look forward to Allah alone in Truth and His pleasure; and that they shall be constant in His Remembrance. And, give the good things - this is the Straight Path.
98.6	Surely, those who reject among the people of the Book and the associates will be in Hell-Fire, wherein they shall abide. They are the worst of the creations.
98.7	Verily, those who have believed and done righteous deeds - those are the best of the creations.
98.8	Their reward with their God is the Paradises of Adnu. The rivers flow beneath them, and therein they abide forever. Allah will be satisfied with them, and they will be satisfied with Allah - such is for those who fear Allah.

Chapter 99
The Earthquake

99.1	When the earth is shaken with a mighty shaking.
99.2	And when the earth brings forth its burdens.
99.3	And man says: What ails it?
99.4	On that Day, it will say the Hadiths - informations. 
99.5	Because your God has informed it.
99.6	Upon that Day, the people of every group shall assemble - that they see their deeds.
99.7	So, each will find his reward for his good deeds, even of an atom's weight it is! 
99.8	And each will find his reward for his evil deeds, even of an atom's weight it is!




Chapter 100
The Racers

100.1	By the racers, breathing heavily!
100.2	And, By the fire as they clash,
100.3	And, By the dawn-sweepers,
100.4	And, By that which spreads the dust,
100.5	And, By that which push through in the midst and scatters,
100.6	Man is ever ingrate unto his God.
100.7	And he suffice as the witness.
100.8	And indeed, he desires the wealth passionately.
100.9	Has he not perceived - when the contents of the tombs are thrown out,
100.10	And what is concealed in the hearts, revealed-
100.11	Upon the Hour, their God is All-Knowing about them.

Chapter 101
The Striking Event

101.1	The Striking Event.
101.2	The Striking Event - What is it?
101.3	The Striking Event - Which will inform you what it is?
101.4	On that Day, the people will be like scattered moths.
101.5	And the mountains will be like wool fluffed up.
101.6	Then as for him whose weight is in a good measure,
101.7	He will be in a life well-satisfied.
101.8	But as for him whose measure is low in weight,
101.9	His abode is 'Haawiah'. 
101.10	And Haawiah - which will inform you what it is?
101.11	A Blazing Fire!

Chapter 102
Greed

102.1	Gross greed diverts you,
102.2	Until you reach the grave,
102.3	Nay, soon ye will know,
102.4	Then again, you will know,
102.5	Nay, had you possessed the wisdom from Allah,
102.6	Surely you will see Hell.
102.7	Then you shall see it for sure.
102.8	Then, on that Day, ye will indeed be questioned about the Bounties.

Chapter 103
The Hour

103.1	By the Hour!
103.2	Verily, man is in loss.
103.3	Except those who believe and strive in righteousness, and exchange the words of Truth to one another; and, exhorting one another to patience.

Chapter 104
Slanderer

104.1	Woe unto every slanderer, traducer;
104.2	Amassing wealth and counts it;
104.3	And considers his wealth will make him immortal!
104.4	Nay, he shall be thrown into 'Hudhama'-
104.5	Which will inform you - what 'Hudhama' is!
104.6	The burning Fire of Allah!
104.7	It will leap up to the heart-
104.7	Surely it is closed in on them;
104.8	In columns outstretched.

Chapter 105
The Elephant

105.1	Have you seen how your God dealt with the Men of the Elephant?
105.2	Did He not bring their plot to nought?
105.3	And He loosed upon them birds in flight.
105.4	Pelting them with stones of baked clay.
105.5	And He made them like chewed straw.

Chapter 106
Quraish

106.1	For the security of the Quraish.
106.2	For their security to set forth in the rainy and summer seasons.
106.3	May they look forward to the God of the house.
106.4	It is He who fed their hunger and secured them from fear.


Chapter 107
Simple necessities

107.1	Have you seen him who denies the righteous life?
107.2	That he repulses the orphans;
107.3 	And bids not feeding the poor;
107.4	And woe to them who are praying!
107.5	Such as those who are away from the remembrance of their God in their prayers.
107.6	They make a show to the people.
107.7	And they will withhold even the simple necessities.

Chapter 108
The Fount

108.1	To thee We have granted the Fount,
108.2	So, obey your God; and sacrifice.
108.3	Surely your enemy - he is the uprooted.

Chapter 109
The Rejecters

109.1	Say: "O the rejecters!
109.2	"I shall not call upon that you worship;
109.3	"Nor shall you call upon that I worship;
109.4	"And I will not worship that you call upon;
109.5	"Nor will you worship that I call upon;
109.6	"To you your way, and to me my way."
Chapter 110
The Help

110.1	When Allah's help and victory comes,
110.2	And when you witness the people come in ranks to the path of Allah,
110.3	Praise your God's Purity, extolling His Attributes; and, seek His forgiveness. Verily, He is Ever-Appreciative of repentance.

Chapter 111
The Palm-fibre

111.1	Woe to both the hands of Abulahab! And woe unto him!
111.2	His wealth and all that he earned were of no avail to him.
111.3	Soon He shall burn in the Blaze!
111.4	His wife - the fuel of the Fire,
111.5	Upon her neck a rope of Palm-fibre.


Chapter 112
Sincerity

112.1	Say: He is Allah, One.
112.2	Allah, the Eternal Refuge,
112.3	He begets not, nor has he begotten,
112.4	And there is none equal to Him.


Chapter 113
The Dawn

113.1	Say, "I seek refuge in the God of dawn,
113.2	"From the evils of what He has created,
113.3	"And as the night covers, from the evils of darkness,
113.4	"And from the evils of the unseen,
113.5	"And from the evils of the envier when he envies."


Chapter 114
The Humans

114.1	Say, "I seek refuge from the God of the Humanity,
114.2	The King of Humanity,
114.3	The God of Humanity,
114.4	From the evil of the slinking whisperer-
114.5	Who whisper in the breasts of the Humanity,
114.6	Of the jinns and the humans."

______________________




